SOURCE: https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/kropotkin-peter/1912/a-debate.html#:~:text=match%20at%20L386%205,Grave%E2%80%99s%20reply

5. P. Kropotkin “Correction” Les Temps Nouveaux 17:52 (April 27 1912):1 (followed by J. Grave’s reply)

CORRECTION

Friend Kropotkin has sent us the following letter.

In northern Mexico there is a quite serious revolutionary movement among the peasants and the republican government is not capable of bringing it to heel.

Landlords have been expropriated by the Indian farmers there. From time to time there have been battles fought and Regeneración is not alone in mentioning these battles.

From Los Angeles I have been sent several Mexican newspapers of varying persuasions with the passages marked that relate to these clashes between government troops and the “insurgents” and this is happening all the time and it is not always the former who come off best in the fighting.

“Skirmishing” might well be the most appropriate term for these encounters as the word “battle” should be used for encounters between larger forces. But it would an utterly false understanding of what all agrarian movements are, including the ones in July-August 1789, not to see that the movement in northern Mexico displays the character that all peasant movements always have.

Which, for me, explains why some friends have been disillusioned by the “Mexican revolution”.

Like so many other Italian, Russian, etc., etc., friends, they have probably dreamed of Garibaldian campaigns and found nothing of the sort. Plains and peaceable countryside, mistrustful (with good reason) of foreigners and – from time to time –

sometimes here and sometimes twenty leagues to the east, south or north of that point, some seven or eight days away, another village drives out the exploiters and takes over the land.

And then, twenty, thirty days after that, a detachment of soldiers shows up “to enforce order”; they execute the rebels, torch the village and just as they are marching off

“victorious”, they walk into an ambush from which the only way they can escape is leave half the detachment behind them, dead or wounded.

This is the stuff of peasant upheaval. And it is plain that if young folk turn up with their dreams of Garibaldian campaigning and brimful of military zeal, all they found there was disappointment. And they quickly realized that they were redundant.

Unfortunately, nine tenths (or perhaps ninety-nine per cent) of anarchists cannot conceive of “revolution” other than in terms of fighting on the barricades or triumphant Garibaldian expeditions.

I can just imagine how let down young Italians of French whose knowledge of

“revolution” comes from the books and poems of bourgeois revolutionaries would have been, had they turned up in 1904 at the time of the peasant uprisings in Russia. They would have gone home “disgusted”, with their dreams of battles, bayonet charges and all the warlike accouterments of the Expedition of the Thousand.

However, now that we have a detailed account of that movement – about which social democrats and anarchists were clueless and which none of them supported, by a long chalk (“Wait for the signal for a general uprising”, these intellectuals were telling them), now that we have documented inquiries into that movement, we can see how immensely important it was for the spread of the revolutionary movement of 1905 and 1906.

So? Would they not have been equally let down had they turned up in Siberia just when 3,000 kilometers of the Trans-Siberian were on strike and when the Strike Committee, negotiating on equal terms with Linevitch, the commander of a five hundred thousand-strong army, made a superb effort to bring one-hundred-and-fifty thousand men back home in one month.

And – as far as we were concerned – that unarmed strike, that expropriation of the State (which owned the railways), that spontaneous organizing on the part of thousands of railway workers across several thousand kilometers’ distance, was not a formidable lesson in matters – to this very day no anarchist has ever set it out before the French workers in all its simplicity and prophetic significance – just as nobody has yet told the story of 1789–1793 as it affected the peasant, in all its innermost simplicity, with no cocked kepis, red sashes, but so much more effective than kepis and sashes.

P. KROPOTKIN