TITLE: Memoirs of a Revolutionist
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: 1906
SOURCE_ID: pg_73882
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/73882-0.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/73882
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-03T20:58:49Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

1871. All shades of revolutionary opinion--Blanquists, Jacobinists,
Internationalists--were represented in it in a true proportion. And yet
the workers themselves, having no distinct ideas of social reform to
impress upon their representatives, the Commune Government did nothing
in that direction. The very fact of having been isolated from the
masses and shut up in the Hôtel de Ville paralysed them. For the very
success of socialism, the ideas of no-government, of self-reliance, of
free initiative of the individual--of anarchism, in a word--had thus
to be preached side by side with those of socialized ownership and
production.

We certainly foresaw that if full freedom is left to the individual
for the expression of his ideas and for action, we should have to face
a certain amount of extravagant exaggerations of our principles. I
had seen it in the Nihilist movement in Russia. But we trusted--and
experience has proved that we were right--that social life itself,
supported by a frank, open-minded criticism of opinions and actions,
would be the most effective means for threshing out opinions and for
divesting them of the unavoidable exaggerations. We acted, in fact, in
accordance with the old saying that freedom remains still the wisest
cure for freedom’s temporary inconveniences. There is, in mankind, a
nucleus of social habits, an inheritance from the past, not yet duly
appreciated, which is _not_ maintained by coercion and is superior to
coercion. Upon it all the progress of mankind is based, and so long as
mankind does not begin to deteriorate physically and mentally, it will
not be destroyed by any amount of criticism or of occasional revolt
against it. These were the opinions in which I grew confirmed more and
more in proportion as my experience of men and things increased.

We understood, at the same time, that such a change cannot be produced
by the conjectures of one man of genius, that it will not be one man’s
discovery, but that it must result from the constructive work of the
masses, just as the forms of judicial procedure which were elaborated
in the early mediæval ages, the village community, the guild, the
mediæval city, or the foundations of international law, were worked out
by the people.

Many of our predecessors had undertaken to picture ideal commonwealths,
basing them upon the principle of authority, or, on some rare
occasions, upon the principle of freedom. Robert Owen and Fourier had
given the world their ideals of a free, organically developing society,
in opposition to the pyramidal ideals which had been copied from the
Roman Empire or from the Roman Church. Proudhon had continued their
work, and Bakúnin, applying his wide and clear understanding of the
philosophy of history to the criticism of present institutions, ‘built
up while he was demolishing.’ But all that was only preparatory work.

The International Workingmen’s Association inaugurated a new method of
solving the problems of practical sociology by appealing to the workers
themselves. The educated men who had joined the association undertook
only to enlighten the workers as to what was going on in different
countries of the world to analyse the obtained results, and, later on,
to aid the workers in formulating their conclusions. We did not pretend
to evolve an ideal commonwealth out of our theoretical views as to what
a society _ought to be_, but we invited the workers to investigate the
causes of the present evils, and in their discussions and congresses
to consider the practical aspects of a better social organization than
the one we live in. A question raised at an international congress was
recommended as a subject of study to all labour unions. In the course
of the year it was discussed all over Europe, in the small meetings of
the sections, with a full knowledge of the local needs of each trade
and each locality; then the work of the sections was brought before the
next congress of each federation, and finally it was submitted in a
more elaborate form to the next international congress. The structure
of the society which we longed for was thus worked out, in theory and
practice, from beneath, and the Jura Federation took a large part in
that elaboration of the anarchist ideal.

For myself, placed as I was in such favourable conditions, I gradually
came to realize that anarchism represents more than a mere mode of
action and a mere conception of a free society; that it is part of a
philosophy, natural and social, which must be developed in a quite
different way from the metaphysical or dialectic methods which have
been employed in sciences dealing with man. I saw that it must be
treated by the same methods as natural sciences; not, however, on the
slippery ground of mere analogies, such as Herbert Spencer accepts, but
on the solid basis of induction applied to human institutions. And I
did my best to accomplish what I could in that direction.

V

Two congresses were held in the autumn of 1877 in Belgium: one of the
International Workingmen’s Association at Verviers, and the other an
International Socialist congress at Ghent. The latter was especially
important, as it was known that an attempt would be made by the
German social democrats to bring all the labour movement of Europe
under one organization, subject to a central committee, which would
be the old general council of the International under a new name.
It was therefore necessary to preserve the autonomy of the labour
organizations in the Latin countries, and we did our best to be well
represented at this congress. I went under the name of Levashóff; two
Germans, the compositor Werner and the engineer Rinke, walked nearly
all the distance from Basel to Belgium; and although we were only nine
anarchists at Ghent, we succeeded in checking the centralization scheme.

Twenty-two years have passed since; a number of International Socialist
congresses have been held, and at every one of them the same struggle
has been renewed--the social democrats trying to enlist all the
labour movement of Europe under their banner and to bring it under
their control, and the anarchists opposing and preventing it. What an
amount of wasted force, of bitter words exchanged and efforts divided,
simply because those who have adopted the formula of ‘conquest of
power within the existing states’ do not understand that activity in
this direction cannot embody all the socialist movement! From the
outset socialism took three independent lines of development, which
found their expression in Saint-Simon, Fourier, and Robert Owen.
Saint-Simonism has developed into social democracy, and Fourierism into
anarchism; while Owenism is developing, in England and America, into
trade-unionism, co-operation, and the so-called municipal socialism,
and remains hostile to social democratic state socialism, while it
has many points of contact with anarchism. But because of failure to
recognize that the three march toward a common goal in three different
ways, and that the two latter bring their own precious contribution to
human progress, a quarter of a century has been given to endeavours
to realize the unrealizable Utopia of a unique labour movement of the
social democratic pattern.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ghent congress ended for me in an unexpected way. Three or four
days after it had begun, the Belgian police learned who Levashóff was,
and received the order to arrest me for a breach of police regulations
which I had committed in giving at the hotel an assumed name. My
Belgian friends warned me. They maintained that the clerical ministry
which was in power was capable of giving me up to Russia, and insisted
upon my leaving the congress at once. They would not let me return to
the hotel; Guillaume barred the way, telling me that I should have to
use force against him if I insisted upon returning thither. I had to go
with some Ghent comrades, and as soon as I joined them, muffled calls
and whistling came from all corners of a dark square over which groups
of workers were scattered. It all looked awfully mysterious. At last,
after much whispering and subdued whistling, a group of comrades took
me under escort to a social democrat worker, with whom I had to spend
the night, and who received me, anarchist though I was, in the most
touching way as a brother. Next morning I left once more for England,
on board a steamer, provoking a number of good-natured smiles from the
British custom-house officers, who wanted me to show them my luggage,
while I had nothing to show but a small hand-bag.

I did not stay long in London. In the admirable collections of the
British Museum I studied the beginnings of the French Revolution--how
revolutions come to break out; but I wanted more activity, and soon
went to Paris. A revival of the labour movement was beginning there,
after the rigid suppression of the Commune. With the Italian Costa and
the few anarchist friends we had among the Paris workers, and with
Jules Guesde and his colleagues who were not strict social democrats at
that time, we started the first socialist groups.

Our beginnings were ridiculously small. Half a dozen of us used to
meet in cafés, and when we had an audience of a hundred persons at a
meeting we felt happy. No one would have guessed then that two years
later the movement would be in full swing. But France has its own ways
of development. When a reaction has gained the upper hand, all visible
traces of a movement disappear. Those who fight against the current are
few. But in some mysterious way, by a sort of invisible infiltration
of ideas, the reaction is undermined; a new current sets in, and then
it appears, all of a sudden, that the idea which was thought to be
dead was there alive, spreading and growing all the time; and as soon
as public agitation becomes possible, thousands of adherents, whose
existence nobody suspected, come to the front. ‘There are at Paris,’
old Blanqui used to say, ‘fifty thousand men who never come to a
meeting or to a demonstration; but the moment they feel that the people
can appear in the streets to manifest their opinion, they are there to
storm the position.’ So it was then. There were not twenty of us to
carry on the movement, not two hundred openly to support it. At the
first commemoration of the Commune, in March 1878, we surely were not
two hundred. But two years later the amnesty for the Commune was voted,
and the working population of Paris was in the streets to greet the
returning Communards; it flocked by the thousand to cheer them at the
meetings, and the socialist movement took a sudden expansion, carrying
with it the Radicals.

The time had not yet come for that revival, however, and one
night, in April 1878, Costa and a French comrade were arrested. A
police-court condemned them to imprisonment for eighteen months as
Internationalists. I escaped arrest only by mistake. The police wanted
Levashóff, and went to arrest a Russian student whose name sounded
very much like that. I had given my real name, and continued to stay
at Paris under that name for another month. Then I was called to
Switzerland.

VI

During this stay at Paris I made my first acquaintance with Turguéneff.
He had expressed to our common friend, P. L. Lavróff, the desire to see
me, and, as a true Russian, to celebrate my escape by a small friendly
dinner. It was with almost a feeling of worship that I crossed the
threshold of his room. If by his ‘Sportsman’s Notebook’ he rendered
to Russia the immense service of throwing odium upon serfdom (I did
not know at that time that he took a leading part in Hérzen’s powerful
‘Bell’), he has rendered no less service through his later novels. He
has shown what the Russian woman is, what treasuries of mind and heart
she possesses, what she may be as an inspirer of men; and he has taught
us how men who have a real claim to superiority look upon women, how
they love. Upon me, and upon thousands of my contemporaries, this part
of his teaching made an indelible impression, far more powerful than
the best articles upon women’s rights.

His appearance is well known. Tall, strongly built, the head covered
with soft and thick grey hair, he was certainly beautiful; his eyes
gleamed with intelligence, not devoid of a touch of humour, and his
whole manner testified to that simplicity and absence of affectation
which are characteristic of the best Russian writers. His fine head
revealed a vast development of brain power, and when he died, and Paul
Bert, with Paul Reclus (the surgeon), weighed his brain, it so much
surpassed the heaviest brain then known--that of Cuvier--reaching
something over two thousand grammes, that they would not trust to their
scales, but got new ones, to repeat the weighing.

His talk was especially remarkable. He spoke, as he wrote, in images.
When he wanted to develop an idea, he did not resort to arguments,
although he was a master in philosophical discussions; he illustrated
his idea by a scene presented in a form as beautiful as if it had been
taken out of one of his novels.

‘You must have had a great deal of experience in your life amongst
Frenchmen, Germans, and other peoples,’ he said to me once. ‘Have you
not remarked that there is a deep, unfathomable chasm between many of
their conceptions and the views which we Russians hold on the same
subjects--points upon which we can never agree?’

I replied that I had not noticed such points.

‘Yes, there are some. Here is one of them. One night, we were at the
first representation of a new play. I was in a box with Flaubert,
Daudet, Zola.... (I am not quite sure whether he named both Daudet and
Zola, but he certainly named one of the two.) All were men of advanced
opinions. The subject of the play was this: A woman had separated from
her husband. She had had a new love and had settled with another man.
This man was represented in the play as an excellent person. For years
they had been quite happy. Her two children--a girl and a boy--were
babies at the moment of the separation; now, they had grown, and
throughout all these years they had considered the man as their real
father. The girl was about eighteen and the boy about seventeen. The
man treated them quite as a father, they loved him, and he loved them.
The scene represented the family meeting at breakfast. The girl comes
in, approaches her supposed father, and he is going to kiss her--when
the boy, who has learned in some way that they are not his children,
rushes forward towards him, and shouts out: “Don’t dare!” _N’osez pas!_

‘The hall was brought down by this exclamation. There was an outburst
of frantic applause. Flaubert and the others joined in it. I was
disgusted. “Why,” I said, “this family was happy; the man was a better
father to these children than their real father, ... their mother loved
him and was happy with him.... This mischievous, perverted boy ought
simply to be flogged for what he has said....” It was of no use. I
discussed for hours with them afterwards: none of them could understand
me!’

I was, of course, fully in accord with Turguéneff’s point of view. I
remarked, however, that his acquaintances were chiefly amongst the
middle classes. There the difference from nation to nation is immense
indeed. But my acquaintances were exclusively amongst the workers, and
there is an immense resemblance between the workers, and especially
amongst the peasants, of all nations.

In so saying, I was, however, quite wrong. After I had had the
opportunity of making a closer acquaintance with French workers, I
often thought of the rightness of Turguéneff’s remark. There is a real
chasm indeed between the conceptions which prevail in Russia upon
marriage relations and those which prevail in France: amongst the
workers as well as in the middle classes; and upon many other points
there is almost the same chasm between the Russian point of view and
that of other nations.

It was said somewhere, after Turguéneff’s death, that he intended to
write a novel upon this subject. If it was begun, the above mentioned
scene must be in his manuscript. What a pity that he did not write that
novel! He, a thorough ‘Occidental’ in his ways of thinking, could have
said very deep things upon a subject which must have so deeply affected
him personally throughout his life.

Of all novel-writers of our century, Turguéneff has certainly attained
the greatest perfection as an artist, and his prose sounds to the
Russian ear like music--music as deep as that of Beethoven. His
principal novels--the series of ‘Dmítri Rúdin,’ ‘A Nobleman’s Retreat,’
‘On the Eve,’ ‘Fathers and Sons,’ ‘Smoke,’ and ‘Virgin Soil’--represent
the leading ‘history-making’ types of the educated classes of Russia,
which evolved in rapid succession after 1848; all sketched with a
fulness of philosophical conception and humanitarian understanding and
an artistic beauty which have no parallel in any other literature. Yet
‘Fathers and Sons’--a novel which he rightly considered his profoundest
work--was received by the young people of Russia with a loud protest.
Our youth declared that the Nihilist Bazároff was by no means a true
representation of his class; many described him even as a caricature
of Nihilism. This misunderstanding deeply affected Turguéneff, and,
although a reconciliation between him and the young generation took
place later on at St. Petersburg, after he had written ‘Virgin Soil,’
the wound inflicted upon him by these attacks was never healed.

He knew from Lavróff that I was an enthusiastic admirer of his
writings; and one day, as we were returning in a carriage from a visit
to Antokólsky’s studio, he asked me what I thought of Bazároff. I
frankly replied, ‘Bazároff is an admirable painting of the Nihilist,
but one feels that you did not love him as much as you did your other
heroes.’ ‘On the contrary, I loved him, intensely loved him,’ Turguéneff
replied, with unexpected vigour. ‘When we get home I will show you my
diary, in which I have noted how I wept when I had ended the novel with
Bazároff’s death.’

Turguéneff certainly loved the intellectual aspect of Bazároff. He so
identified himself with the Nihilist philosophy of his hero that he
even kept a diary in his name, appreciating the current events from
Bazároff’s point of view. But I think that he admired him more than he
loved him. In a brilliant lecture on Hamlet and Don Quixote, he divided
the history-makers of mankind into two classes, represented by one or
the other of these characters. ‘Analysis first of all, and then egoism,
and therefore no faith--an egoist cannot even believe in himself:’ so
he characterized Hamlet. ‘Therefore he is a sceptic, and never will
achieve anything; while Don Quixote, who fights against windmills, and
takes a barber’s plate for the magic helmet of Mambrin (who of us has
never made the same mistake?), is a leader of the masses, because the
masses always follow those who, taking no heed of the sarcasms of the
majority, or even of persecutions, march straight forward, keeping
their eyes fixed upon a goal which they may be alone to see. They
search, they fall, but they rise again, and find it--and by right, too.
Yet, although Hamlet is a sceptic, and disbelieves in Good, he does
not disbelieve in Evil. He hates it; Evil and Deceit are his enemies;
and his scepticism is not indifferentism, but only negation and doubt,
which finally consume his will.’

These thoughts of Turguéneff give, I think, the true key for
understanding his relations to his heroes. He himself and several of
his best friends belonged more or less to the Hamlets. He loved Hamlet,
and admired Don Quixote. So he admired also Bazároff. He represented
his superiority admirably well: he understood the tragic character of
his isolated position; but he could not surround him with that tender,
poetical love which he bestowed, as on a sick friend, when his heroes
approached the Hamlet type. It would have been out of place.

‘Did you know Mýshkin?’ he once asked me, in 1878. At the trial of our
circle Mýshkin revealed himself as the most powerful personality. ‘I
should like to know all about him,’ he continued. ‘That _is_ a man; not
the slightest trace of Hamletism.’ And in so saying he was obviously
meditating on this new type in the Russian movement, which did not
exist in the phase that Turguéneff described in ‘Virgin Soil,’ but was
to appear two years later.

I saw him for the last time in the autumn of 1881. He was very ill,
and worried by the thought that it was his duty to write to Alexander
III.--who had just come to the throne, and hesitated as to the policy
he should follow--asking him to give Russia a constitution, and
proving to him by solid arguments the necessity of that step. With
evident grief he said to me: ‘I feel that I must do it, but I feel I
shall not be able to do it.’ In fact, he was already suffering awful
pains occasioned by a cancer in the spinal cord, and had the greatest
difficulty even in sitting up and talking for a few moments. He did not
write then, and a few weeks later it would have been useless. Alexander
III. had announced in a manifesto his intention to remain the absolute
ruler of Russia.

VII

In the meantime affairs in Russia took quite a new turn. The war
which Russia began against Turkey in 1877 had ended in general
disappointment. There was in the country, before the war broke out, a
great deal of enthusiasm in favour of the Slavonians. Many believed,
also, that the war of liberation in the Balkans would result in a move
in the progressive direction in Russia itself. But the liberation
of the Slavonian populations was only partly accomplished. The
tremendous sacrifices which had been made by the Russians were rendered
ineffectual by the blunders of the higher military authorities.
Hundreds of thousands of men had been slaughtered in battles which
were only half victories, and the concessions wrested from Turkey were
brought to naught at the Berlin Congress. It was also widely known that
the embezzlement of State money went on during this war on almost as
large a scale as during the Crimean war.

It was amidst the general dissatisfaction which prevailed in Russia
at the end of 1877, that one hundred and ninety-three persons,
arrested since 1873, in connection with our agitation, were brought
before a high court. The accused, supported by a number of lawyers
of talent, won at once the sympathies of the public. They produced
a very favourable impression upon St. Petersburg society; and when
it became known that most of them had spent three or four years in
prison, waiting for this trial, and that no less than twenty-one of
them had either put an end to their lives by suicide or become insane,
the feeling grew still stronger in their favour, even among the judges
themselves. The court pronounced very heavy sentences upon a few, and
relatively lenient ones upon the remainder; saying that the preliminary
detention had lasted so long, and was so hard a punishment in itself,
that nothing could justly be added to it. It was confidently expected
that the Emperor would still further mitigate the sentences. It
happened, however, to the astonishment of all, that he revised the
sentences only to increase them. Those whom the court had acquitted
were sent into exile in remote parts of Russia and Siberia, and from
five to twelve years of hard labour were inflicted upon those whom the
court had condemned to short terms of imprisonment. This was the work
of the chief of the Third Section, General Mézentsoff.

At the same time, the chief of the St. Petersburg police, General
Trépoff, noticing, during a visit to the house of detention, that one
of the political prisoners, Bogolúboff, did not take off his hat to
greet the omnipotent satrap, rushed upon him, gave him a blow, and,
when the prisoner resisted, ordered him to be flogged. The other
prisoners, learning the fact in their cells, loudly expressed their
indignation, and were in consequence fearfully beaten by the warders
and the police. The Russian political prisoners bore without murmuring
all hardships inflicted upon them in Siberia, or through hard labour,
but they were firmly decided not to tolerate corporal punishment. A
young girl, Véra Zasúlich, who did not even personally know Bogolúboff,
took a revolver, went to the chief of police, and shot at him. Trépoff
was only wounded. Alexander II. came to look at the heroic girl, who
must have impressed him by her extremely sweet face and her modesty.
Trépoff had so many enemies at St. Petersburg that they managed to
bring the affair before a common-law jury, and Véra Zasúlich declared
in court that she had resorted to arms only when all means for bringing
the affair to public knowledge and obtaining some sort of redress had
been exhausted. Even the St. Petersburg correspondent of the London
‘Times,’ who had been asked to mention the affair in his paper, had not
done so, perhaps thinking it improbable. Then, without telling anyone
about her intentions, she went to shoot Trépoff. Now that the affair
had become public, she was quite happy to know that he was but slightly
wounded. The jury acquitted her unanimously; and when the police tried
to rearrest her, as she was leaving the court-house, the young men of
St. Petersburg, who stood in crowds at the gates, saved her from their
clutches. She went abroad, and soon was among us in Switzerland.

This affair produced quite a sensation throughout Europe. I was at
Paris when the news of the acquittal came, and had to call that day
on business at the offices of several newspapers. I found the editors
glowing with enthusiasm, and writing forcible articles in honour of
this Russian girl. Even the ‘Revue des Deux Mondes,’ in its review of
the year 1878, declared that the two persons who had most impressed
public opinion in Europe during the year were Prince Gortchakóff at
the Berlin Congress and Véra Zasúlich. Their portraits were given side
by side in several almanacs. Upon the workers of Western Europe the
devotion of Véra Zasúlich produced a profound impression.

During the same year, 1878, without any plot having been formed, four
attempts were made against crowned heads in close succession. The
workman Hoedel, and after him Dr. Nobiling, shot at the German Emperor;
a few weeks later, a Spanish workman, Oliva Moncási, followed with an
attempt to shoot the King of Spain, and the cook Passanante rushed
with his knife upon the King of Italy. The governments of Europe could
not believe that such attempts upon the lives of three kings should
have occurred without there being at the bottom some international
conspiracy, and they jumped to the conclusion that the anarchist Jura
Federation was the centre of that conspiracy.

More than twenty years have passed since then, and I can say most
positively that there was absolutely no ground whatever for such
a supposition. However, all the European governments fell upon
Switzerland, reproaching her with harbouring revolutionists who
organized such plots. Paul Brousse, the editor of our Jura newspaper,
the ‘Avant-Garde,’ was arrested and prosecuted. The Swiss judges,
seeing there was not the slightest foundation for connecting Brousse
or the Jura Federation with the recent attempts, condemned Brousse to
only a couple of months’ imprisonment for his articles; but the paper
was suppressed, and all the printing offices of Switzerland were asked
by the federal government not to publish this or any similar paper. The
Jura Federation was thus silenced.

Besides, the politicians of Switzerland, who looked with an
unfavourable eye on the anarchist agitation in their country, acted
privately in such a way as to compel the leading Swiss members of
the Jura Federation either to retire from public life or to starve.
Brousse was expelled from Switzerland. James Guillaume, who for eight
years had maintained against all obstacles the ‘Bulletin’ of the
federation, and made his living chiefly by teaching, could obtain
no employment, and was compelled to leave Switzerland and remove
to France. Adhémar Schwitzguébel, boycotted in the watch trade and
burdened by a large family, had finally to retire from the movement.
Spichiger was in the same condition, and emigrated. It thus happened
that I, a foreigner, had to undertake the editing of a paper for the
federation. I hesitated, of course, but there was nothing else to
be done, and with two friends, Dumartheray and Herzig, I started a
new fortnightly at Geneva, in February 1879, under the title of ‘Le
Révolté.’ I had to write most of it myself. We had only twenty-three
francs to start the paper, but we all set to work to get subscriptions,
and succeeded in issuing our first number. It was moderate in tone, but
revolutionary in substance, and I did my best to write it in such a
style that complicated historical and economical questions should be
comprehensible to every intelligent worker. Six hundred was the utmost
limit which the edition of our previous papers had ever attained. We
printed two thousand copies of ‘Le Révolté,’ and in a few days not one
was left. It was a success, and it still continues, at Paris, under the
title of ‘Temps Nouveaux.’

Socialist newspapers have often a tendency to become mere annals of
complaints about existing conditions. The oppression of the workers
in the mine, the factory, and the field is related; the misery and
sufferings of the workers during strikes are told in vivid pictures;
their helplessness in the struggle against their employers is
insisted upon; and this succession of hopeless efforts, described
every week, exercises a most depressing influence upon the reader. To
counterbalance that effect, the editor has to rely chiefly upon burning
words, by means of which he tries to inspire his readers with energy
and faith. I thought, on the contrary, that a revolutionary paper must
be, above all, a record of those symptoms which everywhere announce
the coming of a new era, the germination of new forms of social life,
the growing revolt against antiquated institutions. These symptoms
should be watched, brought together in their intimate connection, and
so grouped as to show to the hesitating minds of the greater number
the invisible and often unconscious support which advanced ideas find
everywhere, when a revival of thought takes place in society. To make
one feel in sympathy with the throbbing of the human heart all over the
world, with its revolt against age-long injustice, with its attempts
at working out new forms of life--this should be the chief duty of a
revolutionary paper. It is hope, not despair, which makes successful
revolutions.

Historians often tell us how this or that system of philosophy has
accomplished a certain change in human thought, and subsequently in
institutions. But this is not history. The greatest social philosophers
have only caught the indications of coming changes, have understood
their inner relations, and, aided by induction and intuition, have
foretold what was to occur. Sociologists have also drawn plans of
social organizations, by starting from a few principles and developing
them to their necessary consequences, like a geometrical conclusion
from a few axioms; but this is not sociology. A correct social forecast
cannot be made unless one keeps an eye on the thousands of signs of
the new life, separating the occasional facts from those which are
organically essential, and building the generalization upon that basis.

This was the method of thought with which I endeavoured to familiarize
our readers--using plain comprehensible words, so as to accustom the
most modest of them to judge for himself whereunto society is moving,
and himself to correct the thinker if the latter comes to wrong
conclusions. As to the criticism of what exists, I went into it only to
disentangle the roots of the evils, and to show that a deep-seated and
carefully-nurtured fetishism with regard to the antiquated survivals of
past phases of human development, and a widespread cowardice of mind
and will, are the main sources of all evils.

Dumartheray and Herzig gave me full support in that direction.
Dumartheray was born in one of the poorest peasant families in Savoy.
His schooling had not gone beyond the first rudiments of a primary
school. Yet he was one of the most intelligent men I ever met. His
appreciations of current events and men were so remarkable for their
uncommon good sense that they were often prophetic. He was also one of
the finest critics of the current socialist literature, and was never
taken in by the mere display of fine words, or would-be science. Herzig
was a young clerk, born at Geneva; a man of suppressed emotions, shy,
who would blush like a girl when he expressed an original thought,
and who, after I was arrested, when he became responsible for the
continuance of the journal, by sheer force of will learned to write
very well. Boycotted by all Geneva employers, and fallen with his
family into sheer misery, he nevertheless supported the paper till it
became possible to transfer it to Paris.

To the judgment of these two friends I could trust implicitly. If
Herzig frowned, muttering, ‘Yes--well--it may go,’ I knew that it would
not do. And when Dumartheray, who always complained of the bad state
of his spectacles when he had to read a not quite legibly written
manuscript, and therefore generally read proofs only, interrupted his
reading by exclaiming, ‘Non, ça ne va pas!’ I felt at once that it was
not the proper thing, and tried to guess what thought or expression
provoked his disapproval. I knew there was no use asking him, ‘Why will
it not do?’ He would have answered: ‘Ah, that it not my affair; that’s
yours. It won’t do; that is all I can say.’ But I felt he was right,
and I simply sat down to rewrite the passage, or, taking the composing
stick, set up in type a new passage instead.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must own that we had also hard times with our paper. No sooner had
we issued five numbers than the printer asked us to find another
printing office. For the workers and their publications the liberty
of the Press inscribed in the Constitutions has many limitations
beside the paragraphs of the law. The printer had no objection to our
paper--he liked it; but in Switzerland all printing offices depend
upon the government, which employs them more or less in issuing
statistical reports and the like; and our printer was plainly told
that if he continued to harbour our paper he need not expect to have
any more orders from the Geneva government. I made the tour of all
the French-speaking part of Switzerland and saw the heads of all the
printing offices, but everywhere, even from those who did not dislike
the tendency of the paper, I received the same reply: ‘We could not
live without orders from the government, and we should have none if we
undertook to print “Le Révolté.”’

I returned to Geneva in very low spirits, but Dumartheray was only
the more ardent and hopeful. ‘It’s all very simple,’ he said. ‘We buy
our own printing plant on a three months’ credit, and in three months
we shall have paid it.’ ‘But we have no money, only a few hundred
francs,’ I objected. ‘Money? nonsense! We _shall_ have it! Let us
only order the type at once and immediately issue our next number and
money will come!’ Once more he had judged quite right. When our next
number came out from our own _Imprimerie Jurassienne_, and we had told
our difficulties and issued a couple of small pamphlets besides--all
of us helping in the printing--the money came in, mostly in coppers
and silver, but it came. Over and over again in my life I have heard
complaints among the advanced parties about the want of money, but
the longer I live the more I am persuaded that our chief difficulty
does not lie so much in money as in _men_ who would march firmly and
steadily towards a given aim in the right direction and inspire others.
For twenty-one years our paper has now continued to live from hand to
mouth, appeals for funds appearing on the front page almost in every
number; but as long as there is a man who sticks to it and puts all
his energy into it, as Herzig and Dumartheray did at Geneva, and Grave
has done for the last sixteen years at Paris, the money comes in and
the printing expenses are more or less covered, mainly by the pennies
of the workers. For a paper, as for everything else, men are of an
infinitely greater value than money.

We started our printing office in a tiny room, and our compositor was
a Little Russian, who undertook to put our paper in type for the very
modest sum of sixty francs a month. So long as he had his plain dinner
every day, and the possibility of going occasionally to the opera, he
cared for nothing more. ‘Going to the Turkish bath, John?’ I asked him
once as I met him at Geneva in the street, with a brown paper parcel
under his arm. ‘No, removing to a new lodging,’ he replied in his
melodious voice, with his usual smile.

Unfortunately, he knew no French. I used to write my manuscript to the
best of my caligraphic ability--often thinking with regret of the time
I had wasted in the writing classes of our good Ebert at school--but
John would read a French manuscript in the most fantastical way, and
would set up in type the most extraordinary words of his own invention;
but as he ‘kept the space,’ and the length of his lines had not to be
altered for making the corrections, there were only a dozen letters in
each line to be changed, and we managed to do it pretty well. We were
on excellent terms with him, and I soon learned some ‘comping’ under
his direction. The paper was always ready in time to take the proofs
to a Swiss comrade who was the responsible editor, and to whom we
pedantically submitted them before going to print, and then one of us
carted the formes to a printing office. Our _Imprimerie Jurassienne_
soon became widely known for its publications, especially for its
pamphlets, which Dumartheray insisted upon never selling at more than
one penny. Quite a new style had to be worked out for such pamphlets.
I must say that I often had the wickedness of envying those writers
who could use any amount of pages for developing their ideas, and were
allowed to make the well-known excuse of Talleyrand: ‘I have not had
the time to be short.’ When I had to condense the results of several
months’ work--upon, let me say, the origins of law--into a penny
pamphlet, I had to give extra time in order to be short. But we wrote
for the workers, and twopence for a pamphlet is often too much for
them. The result was that our penny and halfpenny pamphlets sold by
the scores of thousands, and were reproduced in every other country in
translations. My leaders from that period were edited later on, while
I was in prison, by Elisée Reclus, under the title of ‘The Words of a
Rebel,’ ‘Paroles d’un Révolté.’

France was always the chief object of our aims, but ‘Le Révolté’ was
severely prohibited in France, and the smugglers have so many good
things to import into France from Switzerland that they did not care to
endanger their trade by meddling with papers. I went once with them,
crossing in their company the French frontier, and found that they were
very brave and reliable men, but I could not induce them to undertake
the smuggling in of our paper. All we could do was to send it in sealed
envelopes to about a hundred persons in France. We charged nothing for
postage, leaving it to the voluntary contributions of our subscribers
to cover our extra expenses--which they always did--but we often
thought that the French police were missing a splendid opportunity for
ruining ‘Le Révolté,’ by subscribing to a hundred copies and sending no
voluntary contributions.

For the first year we had to rely entirely upon ourselves; but
gradually Elisée Reclus took a greater interest in the work, and
finally joined us, giving after my arrest more life than ever to the
paper. Reclus had invited me to aid him in the preparation of the
volume of his monumental geography, which dealt with the Russian
dominions in Asia. He knew Russian himself, but he thought that, as I
was well acquainted with Siberia, I might aid him in a special way;
and as the health of my wife was poor, and the doctor had ordered her
to leave Geneva with its cold winds at once, we removed early in the
spring of 1880 to Clarens, where Elisée Reclus lived at that time. We
settled above Clarens, in a small cottage overlooking the blue waters
of the lake, with the pure snow of the Dent du Midi in the background.
A streamlet that thundered like a mighty torrent after rains, carrying
away immense rocks in its narrow bed, ran under our windows, and on
the slope of the hill opposite rose the old castle of Châtelard,
of which the owners, up to the revolution of the _burla papei_ (the
burners of the papers) in 1799, levied upon the neighbouring serfs
feudal taxes on the occasion of their births, marriages, and deaths.
Here, aided by my wife, with whom I used to discuss every event and
every proposed paper, and who was a severe literary critic of my
writings, I produced the best things that I wrote for ‘Le Révolté,’
among them the address ‘To the Young,’ which was spread in hundreds of
thousands of copies in all languages. In fact, I worked out here the
foundation of nearly all that I have written later on. Contact with
educated men of similar ways of thinking is what we anarchist writers,
scattered by proscription all over the world, miss, perhaps, more than
anything else. At Clarens I had that contact with Elisée Reclus and
Lefrançais, in addition to permanent contact with the workers, which I
continued to maintain; and although I worked much for the geography, I
was able to produce even more than usually for the anarchist propaganda.

VIII

In Russia, the struggle for freedom was taking a more and more acute
character. Several political trials had been brought before high
courts--the trial of ‘the hundred and ninety-three,’ of ‘the fifty,’
of ‘the Dolgúshin circle,’ and so on--and in all of them the same
thing was apparent. The youth had gone to the peasants and the factory
workers, preaching socialism to them; socialist pamphlets, printed
abroad, had been distributed; appeals had been made to revolt--in some
vague, indeterminate way--against the oppressive economical conditions.
In short, nothing was done that is not done in the socialist agitation
in every other country of the world. No traces of conspiracy against
the Tsar, nor even of preparations for revolutionary action, were
found; in fact, there were none. The great majority of our youth
were at that time hostile to such action. Nay, looking now over that
movement of the years 1870-78, I can confidently say that most of them
would have felt satisfied if they had been simply allowed to live by
the side of the peasants and the factory-workers, to teach them, to
collaborate with them, either individually or as members of the local
self-government, in any of the thousand capacities in which an educated
and earnest man or woman can be useful to the masses of the people. I
knew the men and say so with full knowledge of them.

Yet the sentences were ferocious--stupidly ferocious, because the
movement, which had grown out of the previous state of Russia, was too
deeply rooted to be crushed down by mere brutality. Hard labour for
six, ten, twelve years in the mines, with subsequent exile to Siberia
for life, was a common sentence. There were such cases as that of a
girl who got nine years’ hard labour and life exile to Siberia, for
giving one socialist pamphlet to a worker: that was all her crime.
Another girl of fourteen, Miss Gukóvskaya, was transported for life to
a remote village of Siberia, for having tried, like Goethe’s Klärchen,
to excite an indifferent crowd to deliver Koválsky and his friends when
they were going to be hanged--an act the more natural in Russia, even
from the authorities’ standpoint, as there is no capital punishment
in our country for common-law crimes, and the application of the
death penalty to ‘politicals’ was then a novelty, a return to almost
forgotten traditions. Thrown into the wilderness, this young girl soon
drowned herself in the Yeniséi. Even those who were acquitted by the
courts were banished by the gendarmes to little hamlets in Siberia and
North-east Russia, where they had to starve on the government allowance
of six shillings per month. There are no industries in such hamlets,
and the exiles were strictly prohibited from teaching.

As if to exasperate the youth still more, their condemned friends were
not sent direct to Siberia. They were locked up first for a number of
years, in central prisons, which made them envy the convict’s life in
a Siberian mine. These prisons were awful indeed. In one of them--‘a
den of typhoid fever,’ as the priest of that particular gaol said in
a sermon--the mortality reached twenty per cent. in twelve months.
In the central prisons, in the hard labour prisons of Siberia, in
the fortress, the prisoners had to resort to the strike of death,
the famine strike, to protect themselves from the brutality of the
warders, or to obtain conditions--some sort of work, or reading, in
their cells--that would save them from being driven into insanity in
a few months. The horror of such strikes, during which men and women
refused to take any food for seven or eight days in succession, and
then lay motionless, their minds wandering, seemed not to appeal to
the gendarmes. At Khárkoff, the prostrated prisoners were tied up with
ropes and fed artificially, by force.

Information of these horrors leaked out from the prisons, crossed the
boundless distances of Siberia, and spread far and wide among the
youth. There was a time when not a week passed without disclosing some
new infamy of that sort, or even worse.

Sheer exasperation took hold of our young people. ‘In other countries,’
they began to say, ‘men have the courage to resist. An Englishman, a
Frenchman, would not tolerate such outrages. How can we tolerate them?
Let us resist, arms in hand, the nocturnal raids of the gendarmes; let
them know, at least, that since arrest means a slow and infamous death
at their hands, they will have to take us in a mortal struggle.’ At
Odessa, Koválsky and his friends met with revolver shots the gendarmes
who came one night to arrest them.

The reply of Alexander II. to this new move was the proclamation of a
state of siege. Russia was divided into a number of districts, each of
them under a governor-general, who received the order to hang offenders
pitilessly. Koválsky and his friends--who, by the way, had killed no
one by their shots--were executed. Hanging became the order of the
day. Twenty-three persons perished in two years, including a boy of
nineteen, who was caught posting a revolutionary proclamation at a
railway station: this act was the only charge against him. He was a
boy, but he died like a man.

Then the watchword of the revolutionists became ‘self-defence:’
self-defence against the spies who introduced themselves into the
circles under the mask of friendship, and denounced members right and
left, simply because they would not be paid if they did not denounce
large numbers of persons; self-defence against those who ill-treated
prisoners; self-defence against the omnipotent chiefs of the state
police.

Three functionaries of mark and two or three small spies fell in
that new phase of the struggle. General Mézentsoff, who had induced
the Tsar to double the sentences after the trial of the hundred
and ninety-three, was killed in broad daylight at St. Petersburg;
a gendarme colonel, guilty of something worse than that, had the
same fate at Kíeff; and the Governor-General of Khárkoff--my cousin,
Dmítri Kropótkin--was shot as he was returning home from a theatre.
The central prison, in which the first famine strike and artificial
feeding took place, was under his orders. In reality, he was not a
bad man--I know that his personal feelings were somewhat favourable
to the political prisoners; but he was a weak man and a courtier,
and he hesitated to interfere. One word from him would have stopped
the ill-treatment of the prisoners. Alexander II. liked him so much,
and his position at the court was so strong, that his interference
very probably would have been approved. ‘Thank you; you have acted
according to my own wishes,’ the Tsar said to him, a couple of years
before that date, when he came to St. Petersburg to report that he
had taken a peaceful attitude in a riot of the poorer population of
Khárkoff, and had treated the rioters very leniently. But this time he
gave his approval to the gaolers, and the young men of Khárkoff were so
exasperated at the treatment of their friends that one of them shot him.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, the personality of the Emperor was kept out of the struggle,
and down to the year 1879 no attempt was made on his life. The person
of the Liberator of the serfs was surrounded by an aureole which
protected him infinitely better than the swarms of police officials. If
Alexander II. had shown at this juncture the least desire to improve
the state of affairs in Russia; if he had only called in one or two of
those men with whom he had collaborated during the reform period, and
had ordered them to make an inquiry into the conditions of the country,
or merely of the peasantry; if he had shown any intention of limiting
the powers of the secret police, his steps would have been hailed with
enthusiasm. A word would have made him ‘the Liberator’ again, and
once more the youth would have repeated Hérzen’s words: ‘Thou hast
conquered, Galilean.’ But just as during the Polish insurrection the
despot awoke in him, and, inspired by Katkóff, he resorted to hanging,
so now again, following the advice of the same evil genius, Katkóff,
he found nothing to do but to nominate special military governors--for
hanging.

Then, and then only, a handful of revolutionists--the Executive
Committee--supported, I must say, by the growing discontent in the
educated classes, and even in the Tsar’s immediate surroundings,
declared that war against absolutism which, after several attempts,
ended in 1881 in the death of Alexander II.

Two men, I have said already, lived in Alexander II., and now the
conflict between the two, which had grown during all his life, assumed
a really tragic aspect. When he met Solovióff, who shot at him and
missed the first shot, he had the presence of mind to run to the
nearest door, not in a straight line, but in zigzags, while Solovióff
continued to fire; and he thus escaped with but a slight tearing of
his overcoat. On the day of his death, too, he gave a proof of his
undoubted courage. In the face of real danger he was courageous; but
he continually trembled before the phantasms of his own imagination.
Once he shot at an aide-de-camp, when the latter had made an abrupt
movement, and Alexander thought he was going to attempt his life.
Merely to save his life, he surrendered entirely all his imperial
powers into the hands of those who cared nothing for him, but only for
their lucrative positions.

He undoubtedly retained an attachment to the mother of his children,
even though he was then with the Princess Dolgorúki, whom he married
immediately after the death of the Empress. ‘Don’t speak to me of the
Empress; it makes me suffer too much,’he more than once said to Lóris
Mélikoff. And yet he entirely abandoned the Empress Marie, who had
stood faithfully by his side while he was the Liberator; he let her die
in the palace in complete neglect, having by her side only two ladies
entirely devoted to her, while he stayed himself in another palace, and
paid her only short official visits. A well-known Russian doctor, now
dead, told his friends that he, a stranger, felt shocked at the neglect
with which the Empress was treated during her last illness--deserted,
of course, by the ladies of the court, who reserved their courtesies
for the Princess Dolgorúki.

When the Executive Committee made the daring attempt to blow up the
Winter Palace itself, Alexander II. took a step which had no precedent.
He created a sort of dictatorship, vesting unlimited powers in Lóris
Mélikoff. This General was an Armenian, to whom Alexander II. had
once before given similar dictatorial powers, when the bubonic plague
broke out on the Lower Vólga, and Germany threatened to mobilize her
troops and put Russia under quarantine if the plague were not stopped.
Now, when he saw that he could not have confidence in the vigilance
even of the Palace police, Alexander II. gave dictatorial powers to
Lóris Mélikoff, and as Mélikoff had the reputation of being a Liberal,
this new move was interpreted in the sense that the convocation of a
National Assembly would soon follow. However, no new attempts against
his life having been made immediately after that explosion, he regained
confidence, and a few months later, before Mélikoff had been allowed to
do anything, the dictator became simply a Minister of the Interior.

The sudden attacks of sadness of which I have already spoken, during
which Alexander II. reproached himself with the reactionary character
his reign had assumed, now took the shape of violent paroxysms of
tears. He would sit weeping by the hour, filling Mélikoff with despair.
Then he would ask his minister, ‘When will your constitutional scheme
be ready?’ But if, two days later, Mélikoff said that it was ready, the
Emperor seemed to have forgotten all about it. ‘Did I mention it?’ he
would ask. ‘What for? We had better leave it to my successor. That will
be his gift to Russia.’

When rumours of a new plot reached him, he was ready to undertake
something, in order to give satisfaction to the Executive Committee;
but when everything seemed to be quiet among the revolutionists, he
turned his ear again to his reactionary advisers, and let things go. At
any moment Mélikoff expected dismissal.

In February 1881 Mélikoff reported that a new plot had been laid by
the Executive Committee, but its plan could not be discovered by any
amount of searching. Thereupon Alexander II. decided that a sort of
consultative assembly of delegates from the provinces should be called.
Always under the idea that he would share the fate of Louis XVI., he
described this gathering as an _Assemblée des Notables_, like the
one convoked by Louis XVI. before the National Assembly in 1789. The
scheme had to be laid before the council of state, but then again he
hesitated. It was only on the morning of March 1 (13), 1881, after a
new warning by Lóris Mélikoff, that he ordered it to be brought before
the council on the following Thursday. This was on Sunday, and he was
asked by Mélikoff not to go out to the parade that day, there being
immediate danger of an attempt on his life. Nevertheless, he went. He
wanted to see the Grand Duchess Catherine (daughter of his aunt, Hélène
Pávlovna, who had been one of the leaders of the reform party in 1861),
and to carry her the welcome news, perhaps as an expiatory offering to
the memory of the Empress Marie. He is said to have told her, ‘_Je me
suis décidé à convoquer une Assemblée des Notables_.’ However, this
belated and half-hearted concession had not been announced, and on his
way back to the Winter Palace he was killed.

It is known how it happened. A bomb was thrown under his iron-clad
carriage, to stop it. Several Circassians of the escort were wounded.
Rysakóff, who flung the bomb, was arrested on the spot. Then, although
the coachman of the Tsar earnestly advised him not to get out, saying
that he could drive him still in the slightly damaged carriage, he
insisted upon alighting. He felt that his military dignity required him
to see the wounded Circassians, to condole with them as he had done
with the wounded during the Turkish war, when a mad storming of Plevna,
doomed to end in a terrible disaster, was made on the day of his fête.
He approached Rysakóff and asked him something; and as he passed close
by another young man, Grinevétsky, who stood there with a bomb,
Grinevétsky threw the bomb between himself and the Tsar, so that both
of them should be killed. Both were fearfully wounded, and lived but a
few hours.

There Alexander II. lay upon the snow, abandoned by every one of his
followers! All had disappeared. It was some cadets, returning from the
parade, who lifted the dying Tsar and put him in a sledge, covering his
shivering body with a cadet mantle. And it was one of the terrorists,
Emeliánoff, with a bomb wrapped in a paper under his arm, who, at the
risk of being arrested on the spot and hanged, rushed with the cadets
to the help of the wounded man. Human nature is full of these contrasts.

Thus ended the tragedy of Alexander the Second’s life. People could
not understand how it was possible that a Tsar who had done so much
for Russia should have met his death at the hands of revolutionists.
To me, who had the chance of witnessing the first reactionary steps of
Alexander II. and his gradual deterioration, who had caught a glimpse
of his complex personality, and seen in him a born autocrat, whose
violence was but partially mitigated by education, a man possessed of
military gallantry, but devoid of the courage of the statesman, a man
of strong passions and weak will--it seemed that the tragedy developed
with the unavoidable fatality of one of Shakespeare’s dramas. Its last
act was already written for me on the day when I heard him address
us, the promoted officers, on June 13, 1862, immediately after he had
ordered the first executions in Poland.

IX

A wild panic seized the court circles at St. Petersburg. Alexander
III., who, notwithstanding his colossal stature and force, was not
a very courageous man, refused to move to the Winter Palace, and
retired to the palace of his grandfather, Paul I., at Gatchina. I
know that old building, planned as a Vauban fortress, surrounded by
moats and protected by watch towers, from the tops of which secret
staircases lead to the Emperor’s study. I have seen the trap-doors in
the study for suddenly throwing an enemy on the sharp rocks in the
water underneath, and the secret staircase leading to underground
prisons and to an underground passage which opens on a lake. All the
palaces of Paul I. had been built on a similar plan. In the meantime,
an underground gallery, supplied with automatic electric appliances
to protect it from being undermined by the revolutionists, was dug
round the Aníchkoff palace in which Alexander III. resided when he was
heir-apparent.

A secret league for the protection of the Tsar was started. Officers of
all grades were induced by triple salaries to join it, and to undertake
voluntary spying in all classes of society. Amusing scenes followed, of
course. Two officers, without knowing that they both belonged to the
league, would entice each other into a disloyal conversation, during
a railway journey, and then proceed to arrest each other, only to
discover at the last moment that their pains had been labour lost. This
league still exists in a more official shape, under the name of Okhrána
(Protection), and from time to time frightens the present Tsar with all
sorts of concocted dangers, in order to maintain its existence.

A still more secret organization, the Holy League, was formed at the
same time, under the leadership of the brother of the Tsar, Vladímir,
for the purpose of opposing the revolutionists in different ways,
one of which was to kill those of the refugees who were supposed to
have been the leaders of the late conspiracies. I was of this number.
The grand duke violently reproached the officers of the league for
their cowardice, regretting that there were none among them who would
undertake to kill such refugees; and an officer, who had been a page
de chambre at the time I was in the corps of pages, was appointed by
the league to carry out this particular work.

The fact is that the refugees abroad did not interfere with the work
of the Executive Committee at St. Petersburg. To pretend to direct
conspiracies from Switzerland, while those who were at St. Petersburg
acted under a permanent menace of death, would have been sheer
nonsense; and as Stepniák and I wrote several times, none of us would
have accepted the dubious task of forming plans of action without being
on the spot. But, of course, it suited the plans of the St. Petersburg
police to maintain that they were powerless to protect the Tsar because
all plots were devised abroad, and their spies--I know it well--amply
supplied them with the desired reports.

Skóbeleff, the hero of the Turkish war, was also asked to join this
league, but he blankly refused. It appears from Lóris Mélikoff’s
posthumous papers, part of which were published by a friend of his at
London, that when Alexander III. came to the throne, and hesitated to
convoke the Assembly of Notables, Skóbeleff even made an offer to Lóris
Mélikoff and Count Ignátieff (‘the lying Pasha,’ as the Constantinople
diplomatists used to nickname him) to arrest Alexander III., and compel
him to sign a constitutional manifesto; whereupon Ignátieff is said to
have denounced the scheme to the Tsar, and thus to have obtained his
nomination as prime minister, in which capacity he resorted, with the
advice of M. Andrieux, the ex-prefect of police at Paris, to various
stratagems in order to paralyze the revolutionists.

If the Russian Liberals had shown even moderate courage and some power
of organized action at that time, a National Assembly would have
been convoked. From the same posthumous papers of Lóris Mélikoff,
it appears that Alexander III. was willing for a time to convoke a
National Assembly. He had made up his mind to do so, and had announced
it to his brother. Old Wilhelm I. supported him in this intention. It
was only when he saw that the Liberals undertook nothing, while the
Katkóff party was busy at work in the opposite direction--M. Andrieux
advising him to crush the nihilists and indicating how it ought to be
done (the ex-prefect’s letter to this effect was published in the said
papers)--that Alexander III. finally resolved on declaring that he
would continue to be an absolute ruler of the Empire.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few months after the death of Alexander II. I was expelled from
Switzerland by order of the federal council. I did not take umbrage
at this. Assailed by the monarchical powers on account of the asylum
which Switzerland offered to refugees, and menaced by the Russian
official press with a wholesale expulsion of all Swiss governesses and
ladies’ maids, who are numerous in Russia, the rulers of Switzerland,
by banishing me, gave some sort of satisfaction to the Russian police.
But I very much regret, for the sake of Switzerland itself, that that
step was taken. It was a sanction given to the theory of ‘conspiracies
concocted in Switzerland,’ and it was an acknowledgment of weakness, of
which other powers took advantage at once. Two years later, when Jules
Ferry proposed to Italy and Germany the partition of Switzerland, his
argument must have been that the Swiss Government itself had admitted
that Switzerland was ‘a hotbed of international conspiracies.’ This
first concession led to more arrogant demands, and has certainly placed
Switzerland in a far less independent position than it might otherwise
have occupied.

The decree of expulsion was delivered to me immediately after I had
returned from London, where I was present at an anarchist congress in
July 1881. After that congress I had stayed for a few weeks in England,
writing the first articles on Russian affairs from our standpoint, for
the ‘Newcastle Chronicle.’ The English press, at that time, was an
echo of the opinions of Madame Novikóff--that is, of Katkóff and the
Russian state police--and I was most happy when Mr. Joseph Cowen agreed
to give me the hospitality of his paper in order to state our point of
view.

I had just joined my wife in the high mountains where she was staying,
near the abode of Elisée Reclus, when I was asked to leave Switzerland.
We sent the little luggage we had to the next railway station and went
on foot to Aigle, enjoying for the last time the sight of the mountains
that we loved so much. We crossed the hills by taking short cuts over
them, and laughed when we discovered that the short cuts led to long
windings; and when we reached the bottom of the valley, we tramped
along the dusty road. The comical incident which always comes in such
cases was supplied by an English lady. A richly dressed dame, reclining
by the side of a gentleman in a hired carriage, threw several tracts
to the two poorly dressed tramps, as she passed them. I lifted the
tracts from the dust. She was evidently one of those ladies who believe
themselves to be Christians, and consider it their duty to distribute
religious tracts among ‘dissolute foreigners.’ Thinking we were sure
to overtake the lady at the railway station, I wrote on one of the
pamphlets the well-known verse relative to the rich and the Kingdom of
God, and similarly appropriate quotations about the Pharisees being
the worst enemies of Christianity. When we came to Aigle, the lady
was taking refreshments in her carriage. She evidently preferred to
continue the journey in this vehicle along the lovely valley, rather
than to be shut up in a stuffy railway train. I returned her the
pamphlets with politeness, saying that I had added to them something
that she might find useful for her own instruction. The lady did not
know whether to fly at me or to accept the lesson with Christian
patience. Her eyes expressed both impulses in rapid succession.

My wife was about to pass her examination for the degree of Bachelor
of Science at the Geneva University, and we settled, therefore, in a
tiny town of France, Thonon, situated on the Savoy coast of the Lake of
Geneva, and stayed there a couple of months.

As to the death sentence of the Holy League, a warning reached me
from one of the highest quarters of Russia. Even the name of the lady
who was sent from St. Petersburg to Geneva to be the head centre of
the conspiracy became known to me. So I simply communicated the fact
to the Geneva correspondent of the ‘Times,’ asking him to publish
the information if anything should happen, and I put a note to that
effect in ‘Le Révolté.’ After that I did not trouble myself more about
it. My wife did not take it so lightly, and the good peasant woman,
Madame Sansaux, who gave us board and lodgings at Thonon, and who had
learned of the plot in a different way (through her sister, who was a
nurse in the family of a Russian agent), bestowed the most touching
care upon me. Her cottage was out of town, and whenever I went to
town at night--sometimes to meet my wife at the railway station--she
always found a pretext to have me accompanied by her husband with a
lantern. ‘Wait only a moment, Monsieur Kropótkin,’ she would say;
‘my husband is going that way for purchases, and you know he always
carries a lantern!’ Or else she would send her brother to follow me at
a distance, without my noticing it.

X

In October or November 1881, as soon as my wife had passed her
examination, we removed from Thonon to London, where we stayed nearly
twelve months. Few years separate us from that time, and yet I can say
that the intellectual life of London and of all England was quite
different then from what it became a little later. Everyone knows
that in the forties England stood almost at the head of the socialist
movement in Europe; but during the years of reaction that followed,
this great movement, which had deeply affected the working classes,
and in which all that is now put forward as scientific or anarchist
socialism had already been said, came to a standstill. It was forgotten
in England as well as on the Continent, and what the French writers
describe as ‘the third awakening of the proletarians’ had not yet begun
in Britain. The labours of the agricultural commission of 1871, the
propaganda amongst the agricultural labourers, and the previous efforts
of the Christian socialists had certainly done something to prepare the
way; but the outburst of socialist feeling in England which followed
the publication of Henry George’s ‘Progress and Poverty’ had not yet
taken place.

The year that I then passed in London was a year of real exile. For
one who held advanced socialist opinions, there was no atmosphere to
breathe in. There was no sign of that animated socialist movement which
I found so largely developed on my return in 1886. Burns, Champion,
Hardie, and the other labour leaders were not yet heard of; the Fabians
did not exist; Morris had not declared himself a socialist; and the
trade unions, limited in London to a few privileged trades only, were
hostile to socialism. The only active and outspoken representatives
of the socialist movement were Mr. and Mrs. Hyndman, with a very few
workers grouped round them. They had held in the autumn of 1881 a
small congress, and we used to say jokingly--but it was very nearly
true--that Mrs. Hyndman had received all the congress in her house.
Moreover, the more or less socialist radical movement which was
certainly going on in the minds of men did not assert itself frankly
and openly. That considerable number of educated men and women who
appeared in public life four years later, and, without committing
themselves to socialism, took part in various movements connected with
the well-being or the education of the masses, and who have now created
in almost every city of England and Scotland a quite new atmosphere of
reform and a new society of reformers, had not then made themselves
felt. They were there, of course; they thought and spoke; all the
elements for a widespread movement were in existence; but, finding none
of those centres of attraction which the socialist groups subsequently
became, they were lost in the crowd; they did not know one another, or
remained unconscious of their own selves.

Tchaykóvsky was then in London, and, as in years past, we began a
socialist propaganda amongst the workers. Aided by a few English
workers whose acquaintance we had made at the congress of 1881, or whom
the prosecutions against John Most had attracted to the socialists,
we went to the Radical clubs, speaking about Russian affairs, the
movement of our youth toward the people, and socialism in general. We
had ridiculously small audiences, seldom consisting of more than a
dozen men. Occasionally some grey-bearded Chartist would rise from the
audience and tell us that all we were saying had been said forty years
before, and was greeted then with enthusiasm by crowds of workers, but
that now all was dead, and there was no hope of reviving it.

Mr. Hyndman had just published his excellent exposition of Marxist
socialism under the title of ‘England for All’; and I remember, one
day in the summer of 1882, earnestly advising him to start a socialist
paper. I told him with what small means we began editing ‘Le Révolté,’
and predicted a certain success if he would make the attempt. But
so unpromising was the general outlook, that even he thought the
undertaking would be a certain failure, unless he had the means to
defray all its expenses. Perhaps he was right; but when, less than
three years later, he started ‘Justice,’ it found a hearty support
among the workers, and early in 1886 there were three socialist papers,
and the Social Democratic Federation was an influential body.

In the summer of 1882 I spoke, in broken English, before the Durham
miners at their annual gathering; I delivered lectures at Newcastle,
Glasgow, and Edinburgh about the Russian movement, and was received
with enthusiasm, a crowd of workers giving hearty cheers for the
Nihilists, after the meeting, in the street. But my wife and I felt so
lonely at London, and our efforts to awaken a socialist movement in
England seemed so hopeless, that in the autumn of 1882 we decided to
remove again to France. We were sure that in France I should soon be
arrested; but we often said to each other, ‘Better a French prison than
this grave.’

Those who are prone to speak of the slowness of evolution ought to
study the development of socialism in England. Evolution _is_ slow; but
its rate is not uniform. It has its periods of slumber and its periods
of sudden progress.

XI

We settled once more in Thonon, taking lodgings with our former
hostess, Madame Sansaux. A brother of my wife, who was dying of
consumption, and had come to Switzerland, joined us.

I never saw such numbers of Russian spies as during the two months
that I remained at Thonon. To begin with, as soon as we had engaged
lodgings, a suspicious character, who gave himself out for an
Englishman, took the other part of the house. Flocks, literally flocks
of Russian spies besieged the house, seeking admission under all
possible pretexts, or simply tramping in pairs, trios, and quartettes
in front of the house. I can imagine what wonderful reports they wrote.
A spy must report. If he should merely say that he has stood for a week
in the street without noticing anything mysterious, he would soon be
put on the half-pay list or dismissed.

It was then the golden age of the Russian secret police. Ignátieff’s
policy had borne fruit. There were two or three bodies of police
competing with one another, each having any amount of money at their
disposal, and carrying on the boldest intrigues. Colonel Sudéikin,
for instance, chief of one of the branches--plotting with a certain
Degáeff, who after all killed him--denounced Ignátieff’s agents to
the revolutionists, and offered to the terrorists all facilities for
killing the minister of the interior, Count Tolstóy, and the Grand Duke
Vladímir; adding that he himself would then be nominated minister of
the interior, with dictatorial powers, and the Tsar would be entirely
in his hands. This activity of the Russian police culminated, later on,
in the kidnapping of the Prince of Battenberg from Bulgaria.

The French police, also, were on the alert. The question, ‘What is he
doing at Thonon?’ worried them. I continued to edit ‘Le Révolté,’ and
wrote articles for the ‘Encyclopædia Britannica’ and the ‘Newcastle
Chronicle.’ But what reports could be made out of that? One day the
local gendarme paid a visit to my landlady. He had heard from the
street the rattling of some machine, and wished to report that I had
in the house a secret printing press. So he came in my absence and
asked the landlady to show him the press. She replied that there was
none, and suggested that perhaps the gendarme had overheard the noise
of her sewing-machine. But he would not be convinced by so prosaic an
explanation, and actually compelled the landlady to use the machine,
while he listened inside the house and outside, to make sure that the
rattling he had heard was the same.

‘What is he doing all day?’ he asked the landlady.

‘He writes.’

‘He cannot write all day long.’

‘He saws wood in the garden at midday, and he takes walks every
afternoon between four and five.’ It was in November.

‘Ah, that’s it! When the dusk is coming on?’ (_A la tombée de la
nuit?_) And he wrote in his note-book, ‘Never goes out except at dusk.’

I could not well explain at that time this special attention of the
Russian spies; but it must have had some connection with the following.
When Ignátieff was nominated prime minister, advised by the ex-prefect
of Paris, Andrieux, he hit on a new plan. He sent a swarm of his agents
into Switzerland, and one of them undertook the publication of a paper
which slightly advocated the extension of provincial self-government in
Russia, but whose chief purpose was to combat the revolutionists, and
to rally to its standard those of the refugees who did not sympathize
with terrorism. This was certainly a means of sowing division. Then,
when nearly all the members of the Executive Committee had been
arrested in Russia, and a couple of them had taken refuge at Paris,
Ignátieff sent an agent to Paris to offer an armistice. He promised
that there should be no further executions on account of the plots
during the reign of Alexander II., even if those who had escaped arrest
fell into the hands of the government; that Chernyshévsky should be
released from Siberia; and that a commission should be nominated to
revise the cases of all those who had been exiled to Siberia without
trial. On the other side, he asked the Executive Committee to promise
to make no attempts against the Tsar’s life until his coronation was
over. Perhaps the reforms in favour of the peasants, which Alexander
III. intended to make, were also mentioned. The agreement was made
at Paris, and was kept on both sides. The terrorists suspended
hostilities. Nobody was executed for complicity in the former
conspiracies; those who were arrested later on under this indictment
were immured in the Russian Bastille at Schlüsselburg, where nothing
was heard of them for fifteen years, and where most of them still
are. Chernyshévsky was brought back from Siberia, and ordered to
stay at Astrakhan, where he was severed from all connection with the
intellectual world of Russia, and soon died. A commission went through
Siberia, releasing some of the exiles, and specifying terms of exile
for the remainder. My brother Alexander received from it an additional
five years.

While I was at London, in 1882, I was also told one day that a man who
pretended to be a _bonâ fide_ agent of the Russian government, and
could prove it, wanted to enter into negotiations with me. ‘Tell him
that if he comes to my house I will throw him down the staircase,’ was
my reply. The consequence of it was, I suppose, that while Ignátieff
considered the Tsar guaranteed from the attacks of the Executive
Committee, he thought that the anarchists might make some attempt and
wanted therefore to have me out of the way.

XII

The anarchist movement had taken a considerable development in France
during the years 1881 and 1882. It was generally believed that the
French mind was hostile to communism, and within the International
Workingmen’s Association ‘collectivism’ was preached instead.
Collectivism meant then the possession of the instruments of production
in common, each separate group having, however, to settle for itself
whether the consumption of produce should be on individualistic or
communistic lines. In reality, the French mind was hostile only to
the monastic communism, to the _phalanstère_ of the old schools. When
the Jura Federation, at its congress of 1880, boldly declared itself
anarchist-communist--that is, in favour of free communism--anarchism
won wide sympathy in France. Our paper began to spread in that country,
letters were exchanged in great numbers with French workers, and an
anarchist movement of importance rapidly developed at Paris and in some
of the provinces, especially in the Lyons region. When I crossed France
in 1881, on my way from Thonon to London, I visited Lyons, St. Etienne,
and Vienne, lecturing there, and I found in these cities a considerable
number of workers ready to accept our ideas.

By the end of 1882 a terrible crisis prevailed in the Lyons region. The
silk industry was paralysed, and the misery among the weavers was so
great that crowds of children stood every morning at the gates of the
barracks, where the soldiers gave away what they could spare of their
bread and soup. This was the beginning of the popularity of General
Boulanger, who had permitted this distribution of food. The miners of
the region were also in a very precarious state.

I knew that there was a great deal of fermentation, but during the
eleven months I had stayed at London I had lost close contact with
the French movement. A few weeks after I returned to Thonon I learned
from the papers that the miners of Monceau-les-Mines, incensed at the
vexations of the ultra-Catholic owners of the mines, had begun a sort
of movement; they were holding secret meetings, talking of a general
strike; the stone crosses erected on all the roads round the mines
were thrown down or blown up by dynamite cartridges, which are largely
used by the miners in underground work, and often remain in their
possession. The agitation at Lyons also took a more violent character.
The anarchists, who were rather numerous in the city, allowed no
meeting of the opportunist politicians to be held without obtaining
a hearing for themselves--storming the platform, as a last resource.
They brought forward resolutions to the effect that the mines and all
necessaries for production, as well as the dwelling-houses, ought
to be owned by the nation; and these resolutions were carried with
enthusiasm, to the horror of the middle classes.

The feeling among the workers was growing every day against the
opportunist town councillors and political leaders as also against
the Press, who made light of a very acute crisis, and undertook
nothing to relieve the widespread misery. As is usual at such times,
the fury of the poorer people turned especially against the places
of amusement and debauch, which become only the more conspicuous in
times of desolation and misery, as they impersonate for the worker
the egotism and dissoluteness of the wealthier classes. A place
particularly hated by the workers was the underground café at the
Théatre Bellecour, which remained open all night, and where, in the
small hours of the morning, one could see newspaper men and politicians
feasting and drinking in company with gay women. Not a meeting was
held but some menacing allusion was made to that café, and one night a
dynamite cartridge was exploded in it by an unknown hand. A socialist
working-man, who was occasionally there, jumped to blow out the lighted
fuse of the cartridge, and was killed, while a few of the feasting
politicians were slightly wounded. Next day a dynamite cartridge was
exploded at the doors of a recruiting bureau, and it was said that the
anarchists intended to blow up the huge statue of the Virgin which
stands on one of the hills of Lyons. One must have lived at Lyons or
in its neighbourhood to realize the extent to which the population
and the schools are still in the hands of the Catholic clergy, and to
understand the hatred that the male portion of the population feel
toward the clergy.

A panic now seized the wealthier classes of Lyons. Some sixty
anarchists--all workers, and only one middle-class man, Emile Gautier,
who was on a lecturing tour in the region--were arrested. The Lyons
papers undertook at the same time to incite the government to arrest
me, representing me as the leader of the agitation, who had come from
England in order to direct the movement. Russian spies began to parade
again in conspicuous numbers in our small town. Almost every day I
received letters, evidently written by spies of the international
police, mentioning some dynamite plot, or mysteriously announcing
that consignments of dynamite had been shipped to me. I made quite
a collection of these letters, writing on each of them ‘Police
Internationale,’ and they were taken away by the police when they made
a search in my house. But they did not dare to produce these letters
in court, nor did they ever restore them to me. In December, the house
where I stayed was searched in Russian fashion, and my wife, who was
going to Geneva, was arrested at the station in Thonon, and also
searched. But of course nothing was found to compromise me or anyone
else.

Ten days passed, during which I was quite free to go away, if I
had wished to do so. I received several letters advising me to
disappear--one of them from an unknown Russian friend, perhaps a
member of the diplomatic staff, who seemed to have known me, and who
wrote that I must leave at once, because otherwise I should be the
first victim of an extradition treaty which was about to be concluded
between France and Russia. I remained where I was; and when the ‘Times’
inserted a telegram saying that I had disappeared from Thonon, I wrote
a letter to the paper giving my address, and declaring that since so
many of my friends were arrested I had no intention of leaving.

In the night of December 21, my brother-in-law died in my arms. We knew
that his illness was incurable, but to see a young life extinguished
in your presence, after a brave struggle against death, is terrible.
We both were quite broken down. Three or four hours later, as the dull
winter morning was dawning, gendarmes came to the house to arrest me.
Seeing in what a state my wife was, I asked to remain with her till the
burial was over, promising upon my word of honour to be at the prison
door at a given hour; but this was refused, and the same night I was
taken to Lyons. Elisée Reclus, notified by telegraph, came at once,
bestowing on my wife all the gentleness of his great heart; friends
came from Geneva; and although the funeral was an absolutely civil one,
which was a novelty in that little town, half of the population was at
the burial, to show my wife that the hearts of the poorer classes and
the simple Savoy peasants were with us, and not with their rulers. When
my trial was going on, the peasants followed it with sympathy, and used
to come every day from the mountain villages to town to get the papers.

Another incident which profoundly touched me was the arrival at Lyons
of an English friend. He came on behalf of a gentleman well known and
esteemed in the English political world, in whose family I had spent
many happy hours at London in 1882. He was the bearer of a considerable
sum of money for the purpose of obtaining my release on bail, and he
transmitted me at the same time the message of my London friend that
I need not care in the least about the bail, but must leave France
immediately. In some mysterious way he managed to see me freely--not in
the double-grated iron cage in which I was allowed interviews with my
wife--and he was as much affected by my refusal to accept the offer he
came to make as I was by this touching token of friendship on the part
of one who, with his wonderfully excellent wife, I had already learnt
to esteem so highly.

The French government wanted to have one of those great trials which
produce an impression upon the population, but there was no possibility
of prosecuting the arrested anarchists for the explosions. It would
have required bringing us before a jury, which in all probability
would have acquitted us. Consequently, the government adopted the
Machiavellian course of prosecuting us for having belonged to the
International Workingmen’s Association. There is in France a law,
passed immediately after the fall of the Commune, under which men can
be brought before a simple police court for having belonged to that
association. The maximum penalty is five years’ imprisonment; and a
police court is always sure to pronounce the sentences which are wanted
by the government.

The trial began at Lyons in the first days of January 1883, and lasted
about a fortnight. The accusation was ridiculous, as everyone knew that
none of the Lyons workers had ever joined the International, and it
entirely fell through, as may be seen from the following episode. The
only witness for the prosecution was the chief of the secret police at
Lyons, an elderly man, who was treated at the court with the utmost
respect. His report, I must say, was quite correct as concerns the
facts. The anarchists, he said, had taken hold of the population, they
had rendered opportunist meetings impossible because they spoke at each
such meeting, preaching communism and anarchism, and carrying with them
the audiences. Seeing that so far he had been fair in his testimony,
I ventured to ask him a question: ‘Did you ever hear the name of the
International Workingmen’s Association spoken of at Lyons?’

‘Never,’ he replied sulkily.

‘When I returned from the London congress of 1881, and did all I could
to have the International reconstituted in France, did I succeed?’

‘No. They did not find it revolutionary enough.’

‘Thank you,’ I said, and turning toward the procureur I added, ‘There
you have all your case overthrown by your own witness!’

Nevertheless, we were all condemned for having belonged to the
International. Four of us got the maximum sentence, five years’
imprisonment and a hundred pounds’ fine; the remainder got from four
years to one year. In fact, our accusers never tried to prove anything
concerning the International. It was quite forgotten. We were simply
asked to speak about anarchism, and so we did. Not a word was said
about the explosions; and when one or two of the Lyons comrades
wanted to have this point cleared up, they were bluntly told that
they were not prosecuted for that, but for having belonged to the
International--to which I alone belonged.

There is always some comical incident in such trials, and this time
it was supplied by a letter of mine. There was nothing upon which
to base the whole accusation. Scores of searches had been made at
the French anarchists’, but only two letters of mine had been found.
The prosecution tried to make the best of them. One was written to a
French worker, who felt despondent and disheartened. I spoke to him in
my letter about the great times we were living in, the great changes
coming, the birth and spreading of new ideas, and so on. The letter
was not long, and little capital was made out of it by the procureur.
As to the other letter, it was twelve pages long. I had written it
to another French friend, a young shoemaker. He earned his living by
making shoes in his own room for a shop. On his left side he used to
have a small iron stove, upon which he himself cooked his daily meal,
and upon his right a small stool upon which he wrote long letters to
the comrades, without leaving his shoemaker’s low bench. After he had
made just as many pairs of shoes as were required for covering the
expenses of his extremely modest living, and for sending a few francs
to his old mother in the country, he would spend long hours in writing
letters in which he developed the theoretical principles of anarchism
with admirable good sense and intelligence. He is now a writer, well
known in France and generally respected for the integrity of his
character. Unfortunately, at that time he would cover eight or twelve
pages of notepaper without having put one single full-stop, or even a
comma. I once sat down and wrote a long letter in which I explained to
him how our thoughts subdivide into groups of sentences, which must be
marked by full-stops; into separate sentences which must be separated
by stops, and finally into secondary ones which deserve the charity of
being marked at least with commas. I told him how much it would improve
his writings if he took this simple precaution.

This letter was read by the prosecutor before the court, and elicited
from him most pathetic comments: ‘You have heard, gentlemen, this
letter’--he went on, addressing the court. ‘You have listened to it.
There is nothing particular in it at first sight. He gives a lesson
of grammar to a worker.... But’--and here his voice vibrated with
accents of deep emotion--‘it was not in order to help a poor worker in
instruction which he, owing probably to his laziness, failed to get
at school. It was not to help him in earning an honest living.... No,
gentlemen--it was written in order to inspire him with hatred for our
grand and beautiful institutions, in order only the better to infuse
him with the venom of anarchism, in order to make of him only a more
terrible enemy of society.... Cursed be the day that Kropótkin put his
foot on the soil of France!’ he exclaimed with a wonderful pathos.

We could not help laughing like boys all the time he delivered that
speech; the judges stared at him as if to tell him that he was
overdoing his rôle, but he seemed not to notice anything, and, carried
on by his eloquence, he went on speaking with more and more theatrical
gestures and intonations. He really did his best to obtain his reward
from the Russian government.

Very soon after the condemnation the presiding magistrate was promoted
to the magistracy of an assize court. As to the procureur and another
magistrate--one would hardly believe it--the Russian government offered
them the Russian cross of Sainte-Anne, and they were allowed by the
republic to accept it! The famous Russian alliance had thus its origin
in the Lyons trial.

This trial, which lasted a fortnight, during which most brilliant
anarchist speeches, reported by all the papers, were made by such
first-rate speakers as the worker Bernard and Emile Gautier, and during
which all the accused took a very firm attitude, preaching all the time
our doctrines, had a powerful influence in spreading anarchist ideas
in France, and assuredly contributed to some extent to the revival of
socialism in other countries. As to the condemnation, it was so little
justified by the proceedings that the French Press--with the exception
of the papers devoted to the government--openly blamed the magistrates.
Even the moderate ‘Journal des Economistes’ blamed the condemnation,
which ‘nothing in the proceedings of the court could have made one
foresee.’ The contest between the accusers and ourselves was won by us,
in the public opinion. Immediately a proposition of amnesty was brought
before the Chamber, and received about a hundred votes in support of
it. It came up regularly every year, each time securing more and more
votes, until we were released.

XIII

The trial was over, but I remained for another couple of months at
the Lyons prison. Most of my comrades had lodged an appeal against
the decision of the police court and we had to wait for its results.
With four more comrades I refused to take any part in that appeal to a
higher court, and continued to work in my _pistole_. A great friend
of mine, Martin--a clothier from Vienne--took another _pistole_ by the
side of the one which I occupied, and as we were already condemned, we
were allowed to take our walks together; and when we had something to
say to each other between the walks, we used to correspond by means of
taps on the wall, just as in Russia.

Already during my sojourn at Lyons I began to realize the awfully
demoralising influence of the prisons upon the prisoners, which brought
me later to condemn unconditionally the whole institution.

The Lyons prison is a ‘modern’ prison, built in the shape of a star,
on the cellular system. The spaces between the rays of the star-like
building are occupied by small asphalte-paved yards, and, weather
permitting, the inmates are taken to these yards to work outdoors.
They mostly beat out the unwound silk cocoons to obtain floss silk.
Flocks of children are also taken at certain hours to these yards.
Thin, emasculated, underfed--the shadows of children--I often watched
them from my window. Anæmia was plainly written on all the little faces
and manifest in their thin, shivering bodies; and not only in the
dormitories but also in the yards, in the full light of the sun, they
themselves increased their anæmia. What will become of these children
after they have passed through that schooling and come out with their
health ruined, their will annihilated, their energy weakened? Anæmia,
with its weakened energy and unwillingness to work, its enfeebled
will, weakened intellect, and perverted imagination, is responsible
for crime to an infinitely greater extent than plethora, and it is
precisely this enemy of the human race which is bred in prison. And
then, the teachings which the children receive in these surroundings!
Mere isolation, even if it were rigorously carried out--and it cannot
be--would be of little avail; the whole atmosphere of every prison is
an atmosphere of glorification of that sort of gambling in ‘clever
strokes’ which constitutes the very essence of theft, swindling,
and all sorts of similar anti-social deeds. Whole generations of
future prisoners are bred in these nurseries which the state supports
and society tolerates, simply because it does not want to hear its
own diseases spoken of and dissected. ‘Imprisoned in childhood:
prison-bird for life,’ was what I heard afterwards from all those who
were interested in criminal matters. And when I saw these children
and realized what they had to expect in the future, I could not but
continually ask myself: ‘Which of them is the worst criminal--this
child or the judge who condemns every year hundreds of children to this
fate?’ I gladly admit that the crime of these judges is unconscious.
But are, then, all the ‘crimes’ for which people are sent to prison as
conscious as they are supposed to be?

There was another point which I vividly realized since the very first
weeks of my imprisonment, but which, in some inconceivable way,
escapes the attention of both the judges and the writers on criminal
law--namely, that imprisonment in an immense number of cases is a
punishment which strikes quite innocent people far more severely than
the condemned prisoners themselves.

Nearly every one of my comrades, who represented a fair average of the
working-men population, had either their wife and children to support,
or a sister or an old mother who depended for their living upon his
earnings. Now, being left without support, these women did their best
to get work, and some of them got it, but none of them succeeded in
earning regularly even as much as fifteen pence a day. Nine francs
(less than eight shillings), and often six shillings a week, to support
themselves and their children was all they could earn. And that meant
evidently underfeeding, privations of all sorts, and the deterioration
of the health of the wife and the children: weakened intellect,
weakened energy and will. I thus realized that what was going on in
our law courts was in reality a condemnation of quite innocent people
to all sorts of hardships, in most cases even worse than those to
which the condemned man himself is submitted. The fiction is that the
law punishes the man by inflicting upon him a variety of physical and
degrading hardships. But man is such a creature that whatever hardships
be imposed upon him, he gradually grows accustomed to them. As he
cannot modify them he accepts them, and after a certain time he puts
up with them, just as he puts up with a chronic disease, and grows
insensible to it. But what, during his imprisonment, becomes of his
wife and children, that is, of the innocent people who depend upon him
for support? They are punished even more cruelly than he himself is.
And in our routine habits of thought no one ever thinks of the immense
injustice which is thus committed. I realized it only from actual
experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the middle of March 1883, twenty-two of us who had been condemned
to more than one year of imprisonment, were removed in great secrecy
to the central prison of Clairvaux. It was formerly an abbey of St.
Bernard, of which the great Revolution had made a house for the poor.
Subsequently it became a house of detention and correction, which
went among the prisoners and the officials themselves under the
well-deserved nickname of ‘house of detention and corruption.’

So long as we were kept at Lyons we were treated as the prisoners
under preliminary arrest are treated in France; that is, we had our
own clothes, we could get our own food from a restaurant, and one
could hire for a few francs per month a larger cell, a _pistole_.
I took advantage of this for working hard upon my articles for the
‘Encyclopædia Britannica’ and the ‘Nineteenth Century.’ Now, the
treatment we should have at Clairvaux was an open question. However, in
France it is generally understood that, for political prisoners, the
loss of liberty and forced inactivity are in themselves so hard that
there is no need to inflict additional hardships. Consequently, we were
told that we should remain under the _régime_ of preliminary detention.
We should have separate quarters, retain our own clothes, be free from
compulsory work, and be allowed to smoke. ‘Those of you,’ the governor
said, ‘who wish to earn something by manual work, will be enabled to
do so by sewing stays or engraving small things in mother-of-pearl.
This work is poorly paid; but you could not be employed in the prison
workshops for the fabrication of iron beds, picture frames, and so on,
because that would require your lodging with the common-law prisoners.’
Like the other prisoners we were allowed to buy from the prison canteen
some additional food and a pint of claret every day, both being
supplied at a very low price and of good quality.

The first impression which Clairvaux produced upon me was most
favourable. We had been locked up and had been travelling all the day,
from two or three o’clock in the morning, in those tiny cupboards
into which the cellular railway carriages are usually divided. When
we reached the central prison we were taken temporarily to the
cellular, or punishment quarters, and were introduced into the usual
but extremely clean cells. Hot food, plain but of excellent quality,
had been served to us notwithstanding the late hour of the night, and
we had been offered the opportunity of having the half-pint of very
good _vin du pays_ (local wine) which was sold to the prisoners by the
prison canteen, at the extremely low price of 24 centimes (less than
2½_d._) per quart. The governor and the warders were most polite to us.

Next day the governor of the prison took me to see the rooms which he
intended to give us, and when I remarked that they were all right but
only a little too small for such a number--we were twenty-two--and
that overcrowding might result in illness, he gave us another set of
rooms in what was in olden times the house of the superintendent of
the abbey, and now was the hospital. Our windows looked out upon a
little garden, and beyond it we had beautiful views of the surrounding
country. In another room on the same landing old Blanqui had been kept
the last three or four years before his release. Before that he had
been imprisoned in the cellular house.

Besides the three spacious rooms which were given to us, a smaller
room was spared for Gautier and myself, so that we could pursue our
literary work. We probably owed this last favour to the intervention
of a considerable number of English men of science who, as soon as I
was condemned, had addressed a petition to the President asking for my
release. Many contributors to the ‘Encyclopædia Britannica,’ as well
as Herbert Spencer and Swinburne, had signed, while Victor Hugo had
added to his signature a few warm words. Altogether, public opinion in
France received our condemnation very unfavourably; and when my wife
had mentioned at Paris that I required books, the Academy of Sciences
offered the use of its library, and Ernest Renan, in a charming letter,
put his private library at her service.

We had a small garden, where we could play nine-pins or _jeu de
boules_. We managed, moreover, to cultivate a narrow bed running
along the wall, and, on a surface of some eighty square yards, we
grew almost incredible quantities of lettuces and radishes, as well
as some flowers. I need not say that we at once organized classes,
and during the three years that we remained at Clairvaux I gave my
comrades lessons in cosmography, geometry, or physics, also aiding
them in the study of languages. Nearly every one learned at least one
language--English, German, Italian, or Spanish--while a few learned
two. We also managed to do some book-binding, having learned how from
one of those excellent Encyclopédie Roret booklets.

At the end of the first year, however, my health again gave way.
Clairvaux is built on marshy ground, upon which malaria is endemic,
and malaria, with scurvy, laid hold of me. Then my wife, who was
studying at Paris, working in Würtz’s laboratory and preparing to
take an examination for the degree of Doctor of Science, abandoned
everything, and came to stay in the hamlet of Clairvaux, which consists
of less than a dozen houses grouped at the foot of an immense high wall
which encircles the prison. Of course, her life in that hamlet, with
the prison wall opposite, was anything but gay; yet she stayed there
till I was released. During the first year she was allowed to see me
only once in two months, and all interviews were held in the presence
of a warder, who sat between us. But when she settled at Clairvaux,
declaring her firm intention to remain there, she was soon permitted
to see me every day, in one of the small guard-houses of the warders,
within the prison walls, and food was brought me from the inn where she
stayed. Later, we were even allowed to take a walk in the governor’s
garden, closely watched all the time, and usually one of my comrades
joined us in the walk.

I was quite astonished to discover that the central prison of Clairvaux
had all the aspects of a small manufacturing town, surrounded by
orchards and cornfields, all encircled by an outer wall. The fact
is that if in a French central prison the inmates are perhaps more
dependent upon the fancies and caprices of the governor and the
warders than they seem to be in English prisons, the treatment of the
prisoners is far more humane than it is in the corresponding lock-ups
on this side of the Channel. The mediæval spirit of revenge which still
prevails in English prisons has long since been given up in France.
The imprisoned man is not compelled to sleep on planks, or to have a
mattress on alternate days only; the day he comes to the prison he gets
a decent bed and retains it. He is not compelled either to do degrading
work, such as to climb a wheel, or to pick oakum; he is employed, on
the contrary, in useful work, and this is why the Clairvaux prison
has the aspect of a manufacturing town in which iron furniture,
picture-frames, looking-glasses, metric measures, velvet, linen,
ladies’ stays, small things in mother-of-pearl, wooden shoes, and so
on, are fabricated by the nearly 1,600 men who are kept there.

Moreover, if the punishment for insubordination is very cruel, there
is none of the flogging which still goes on in English prisons: such a
punishment would be absolutely impossible in France. Altogether, the
central prison at Clairvaux may be described as one of the best prisons
in Europe. And yet, the results obtained at Clairvaux are as bad as in
any one of the lock-ups of the old type. ‘The watchword nowadays is to
say that prisoners are reformed in our prisons,’ one of the members of
the prison administration once said to me. ‘This is all nonsense, and I
shall never be induced to tell such a lie.’

       *       *       *       *       *

The pharmacy at Clairvaux was underneath the rooms which we occupied,
and we occasionally had some contact with the prisoners who were
employed in it. One of them was a grey-haired man in his fifties,
who ended his term while we were there. It was touching to learn how
he parted with the prison. He knew that in a few months or weeks he
would be back, and begged the doctor to keep the place at the pharmacy
open for him. This was not his first visit to Clairvaux, and he knew
it would not be the last. When he was set free he had not a soul in
the world to whom he might go to spend his old age. ‘Who will care
to employ me?’ he said. ‘And what trade have I? None! When I am out
I must go to my old comrades; they, at least, will surely receive me
as an old friend.’ Then would come a glass too much of drink in their
company, excited talk about some capital fun--some capital ‘new stroke’
to be made in the way of theft--and, partly from weakness of will,
partly to oblige his only friends, he would join in it, and would be
locked up once more. So it had been several times before in his life.
Two months passed, however, after his release, and he was not yet
back to Clairvaux. Then the prisoners, and the warders too, began to
feel uneasy about him. ‘Has he had time to move to another judicial
district, that he is not yet back? One can only hope that he has not
been involved in some bad affair,’ they would say, meaning something
worse than theft. ‘That would be a pity: he was such a nice, quiet
man.’ But it soon appeared that the first supposition was the right
one. Word came from another prison that the old man was locked up
there, and was now endeavouring to be transferred to Clairvaux.

The old prisoners were the most pitiful sight. Many of them had begun
their prison experience in childhood or early youth, others at a riper
age. But ‘once in prison, always in prison,’ such is the saying derived
from experience. And now, having reached or passed over the age of
sixty, they knew that they must end their lives in a gaol. To quicken
their departure from life the prison administration used to send them
to the workshops where felt socks were made out of all sorts of woollen
refuse. The dust in the workshop soon gave these old men consumption,
which finally released them. Then four fellow prisoners would carry the
old comrade to the common grave, the graveyard warder and his black dog
being the only two beings to follow him; and while the prison priest
would march in front of the procession, mechanically reciting his
prayer and looking round at the chestnut or fir-trees along the road,
and the four comrades carrying the coffin would enjoy their momentary
escape out of prison, the black dog would be the only being affected by
the solemnity of the ceremony.

When the reformed central prisons were introduced in France, it was
believed that the principle of absolute silence could be maintained in
them. But it is so contrary to human nature that its strict enforcement
had to be abandoned. In fact, even solitary confinement is no obstacle
to intercourse between the prisoners.

To the outward observer the prison seems to be quite mute; but in
reality life goes on in it as busily as in a small town. In suppressed
voices, by means of whispers, hurriedly dropped words, and scraps of
notes, every news of any interest spreads immediately all over the
prison. Nothing can happen either among the prisoners themselves, or
in the _cour d’honneur_, where the lodgings of the administration are
situated, or in the village of Clairvaux, where the employers of the
factories live, or in the wide world of Paris politics, but that it
is communicated at once throughout all the dormitories, workshops,
and cells. Frenchmen are of too communicative a nature for their
underground telegraph ever to be stopped. We had no intercourse with
the common-law prisoners, and yet we knew all the news of the day.
‘John, the gardener, is back for two years.’ ‘Such an inspector’s wife
has had a fearful scrimmage with So-and-So’s wife.’ ‘James, in the
cells, has been caught transmitting a note of friendship to John from
the framers’ workshop.’ ‘That old beast So-and-So is no more minister
of justice: the ministry has been upset.’ And so on; and when the news
goes that ‘Jack has got two five-penny packets of tobacco in exchange
for two flannel spencers,’ it flies round the prison in no time.

Demands for tobacco were continually pouring in upon us; and when a
small lawyer detained in the prison wanted to transmit to me a note, in
order to ask my wife, who was staying in the village, to see from time
to time his wife, who was also there, quite a number of men took the
liveliest interest in the transmission of that message, which had to
pass I do not know how many hands before it reached its goal. And when
there was something that might specially interest us in a paper, this
paper, in some unaccountable way, would reach us, with a little stone
wrapped into it, to help its being thrown over a high wall.

Cellular imprisonment is no obstacle to communication. When we came
to Clairvaux and were first lodged in the cellular quarter, it was
bitterly cold in the cells; so cold, indeed, that when I wrote to
my wife, who was then at Paris, and she got my letter, she did not
recognize the writing, my hand being so stiff with the cold. The order
came to heat the cells as much as possible; but do what they might,
the cells remained as cold as ever. It appeared afterwards that all
the hot-air tubes in the cells were choked with scraps of paper, bits
of notes, penknives, and all sorts of small things which several
generations of prisoners had concealed in the pipes.

Martin, the same friend of mine whom I have already mentioned, obtained
permission to serve part of his time in cellular confinement. He
preferred isolation to life in a room with a dozen comrades, and went
to a cell in the cellular building. To his great astonishment he found
that he was not at all alone in his cell. The walls and the keyholes
spoke round him. In a day or two all the inmates of the cells knew who
he was, and he had acquaintances all over the building. Quite a life
goes on, as in a beehive, between the seemingly isolated cells; only
that life often takes such a character as to make it belong entirely
to the domain of psychopathy. Kraft-Ebbing himself had no idea of the
aspects it takes with certain prisoners in solitary confinement.

I will not repeat here what I have said in a book, ‘In Russian and
French Prisons,’ which I published in England in 1886, soon after my
release from Clairvaux, upon the moral influence of prisoners upon
prisoners. But there is one thing which must be said. The prison
population consists of heterogeneous elements; but, taking only those
who are usually described as ‘the criminals’ proper, and of whom we
have heard so much lately from Lombroso and his followers, what struck
me most as regards them was that the prisons, which are considered
as a preventive measure against anti-social deeds, are exactly the
institutions for breeding them and for rendering these offences
worse and worse after a man has received prison education. Everyone
knows that the absence of education, the dislike of regular work
acquired since childhood, the physical unpreparedness for sustained
effort, the love of adventure when it receives a wrong direction,
the gambling propensities, the absence of energy and an untrained
will, and carelessness about the happiness of others, are the causes
which bring this category of men before the courts. Now I was deeply
impressed during my imprisonment by the fact that it is exactly these
defects of human nature--each one of them--which the prison breeds in
its inmates; and it is bound to breed them because it is a prison,
and will breed them so long as there are prisons. Incarceration in a
prison necessarily, fatally, destroys the energy of a man, and still
more kills his will. In prison life there is no room for exercising
one’s will. To possess one’s own will in prison means surely to get
into trouble. The will of the prisoner _must_ be killed, and it
is killed. Still less is there room for exercising one’s natural
sympathies, everything being done to destroy free contact with those
outside the prison and within it with whom the prisoner may have
feelings of sympathy. Physically and mentally he is rendered less
and less prepared for sustained effort; and if he has had formerly
a dislike for regular work, this dislike is only the more increased
during his prison years. If, before he first came to the prison, he
soon felt tired by monotonous work, which he could not do properly,
or had a grudge against underpaid overwork, his dislike now becomes
hatred. If he doubted about the social utility of current rules of
morality, now, after having cast a critical glance upon the official
defenders of these rules, and learned his comrades’ opinions of them,
he openly casts the rules overboard. And if he has got into trouble in
consequence of a morbid development of the passionate sensual side of
his nature, now, after having spent a number of years in prison, this
morbid character is still more developed--in many cases to an appalling
extent. In this last direction--the most dangerous of all--prison
education is most effective.

In Siberia I had seen what sinks of filth, and what workshops of
physical and moral deterioration the dirty, overcrowded, ‘unreformed’
Russian prisons were, and at the age of nineteen I imagined that if
there were less overcrowding in the rooms, and a certain classification
of the prisoners, and healthy occupations were provided for them,
the institution might be substantially improved. Now, I had to part
with these illusions. I could convince myself that as regards their
effects upon the prisoners, and their results for society at large,
the best ‘reformed’ prisons--whether cellular or not--are as bad as,
or even worse, than the dirty lock-ups of old. They do not ‘reform’
the prisoners. On the contrary, in the immense, overwhelming majority
of cases, they exercise upon them the most deteriorating effect. The
thief, the swindler, the rough man, and so on, who has spent some
years in a prison, comes out of it more ready than ever to resume his
former career; he is better prepared for it; he has learned how to do
it better; he is more embittered against society, and he finds a more
solid justification for being in revolt against its laws and customs;
necessarily, unavoidably, he is bound to go farther and farther along
the anti-social path which first brought him before a law court. The
offences he will commit after his release will be graver than those
which first got him into trouble; and he is doomed to finish his life
in a prison or in a hard-labour colony. In the above-mentioned book
I wrote that prisons are ‘universities of crime, maintained by the
state.’ And now, thinking of it at fifteen years’ distance, in the
light of my subsequent experience, I can only confirm that statement of
mine.

Personally I have no reason whatever to complain of the years I have
spent in a French prison. For an active and independent man the
restraint of liberty and activity is in itself so great a privation
that all the remainder, all the petty miseries of prison life, are not
worth speaking of. Of course, when we heard of the active political
life which was going on in France, we resented very much our forced
inactivity. The end of the first year, especially during a gloomy
winter, is always hard for the prisoner. And when spring comes, one
feels more strongly than ever the want of liberty. When I saw from our
windows the meadows assuming their green garb, and the hills covered
with a spring haze, or when I saw a train flying into a dale between
the hills, I certainly felt a strong desire to follow it, to breathe
the air of the woods, to be carried along with the stream of human life
into a busy town. But one who casts his lot with an advanced party
must be prepared to spend a number of years in prison, and he need not
grudge it. He feels that even during his imprisonment he remains not
quite an inactive part of the stream of human progress which spreads
and strengthens the ideas which are dear to him.

At Lyons my comrades, my wife, and myself certainly found the warders
a very rough set of men. But after a couple of encounters all was
set right. Moreover, the prison administration knew that we had the
Paris press with us, and they did not want to draw upon themselves
the thunders of Rochefort or the cutting criticisms of Clémenceau.
And at Clairvaux there was no need of such a restraint. All the
administration had been renewed a few months before we came thither.
A prisoner had been killed by warders in his cell, and his corpse had
been hanged to simulate suicide; but this time the affair leaked out
through the doctor; the governor was dismissed, and altogether a better
tone prevailed in the prison. I took back from Clairvaux the best
recollections of its governor; and altogether, while I was there, I
more than once thought that, after all, men are often better than the
institutions to which they belong. But having no personal griefs, I can
all the more freely, and most unconditionally condemn the institution
itself, as a survival from the dark past, wrong in its principles, and
a source of unfathomable evil to society.

One thing more I must mention as it struck me, perhaps, even more
than the demoralising effects of prisons upon their inmates. What
a nest of infection is every prison, and even a law court for its
neighbourhood--for the people who live about them. Lombroso has made
very much of the ‘criminal type’ which he believes to have discovered
amongst the inmates of the prisons. If he had made the same efforts
to observe people who hang about the law courts--detectives, spies,
small solicitors, informers, people preying upon simpletons, and the
like--he would have probably concluded that his ‘criminal type’ has a
far greater geographical extension than the prison walls. I never saw
such a collection of faces of the lowest human type, sunk far below
the average type of mankind, as I saw by the score round and within
the Palais de Justice at Lyons. Certainly not within the prison walls
of Clairvaux. Dickens and Cruikshank have immortalized a few of these
types; but they represent quite a world which gravitates round the law
courts, and infuses its infection far and wide around them. And the
same is true of each central prison like Clairvaux. Quite an atmosphere
of petty thefts, petty swindlings, spying and corruption of all sorts
spreads like a blot of oil round every prison.

I saw all this; and if before my condemnation I already knew that
society is wrong in its present system of punishments, after I left
Clairvaux I knew that it is not only wrong and unjust in this system,
but that it is simply foolish when, in its partly unconscious and
partly wilful ignorance of realities, it maintains at its own expense
these universities of crime and these sinks of corruption, acting
under the illusion that they are necessary as a bridle to the criminal
instincts of man.

XIV

Every revolutionist meets a number of spies and _agents provocateurs_
in his path, and I have had my fair share of them. All governments
spend considerable sums of money in maintaining this kind of reptile.
However, they are mainly dangerous to young people. One who has had
some experience of life and men soon discovers that there is about
these creatures something which puts him on his guard. They are
recruited from the scum of society, amongst men of the lowest moral
standard, and if one is watchful of the moral character of the men he
meets with, he soon notices something in the manners of these ‘pillars
of society’ which shocks him, and then he asks himself the question:
‘What has brought this person to me? What in the world can he have in
common with us?’ In most cases this simple question is sufficient to
put a man upon his guard.

When I first came to Geneva, the agent of the Russian government who
had been commissioned to spy the refugees was well known to all of us.
He went under the name of Count Something; but as he had no footman and
no carriage on which to emblazon his coronet and arms, he had had them
embroidered on a sort of mantle which covered his tiny dog. We saw him
occasionally in the cafés, without speaking to him; he was, in fact, an
‘innocent’ who simply bought in the kiosques all the publications of
the exiles, very probably adding to them such comments as he thought
would please his chiefs.

Different men began to pour in when Geneva was peopled with more and
more refugees of the young generation; and yet, in one way or another,
they also became known to us.

When a stranger appeared on our horizon, he was asked with usual
nihilist frankness about his past and his present prospects, and it
soon appeared what sort of person he or she was. Frankness in mutual
intercourse is altogether the best way for bringing about proper
relations between men. In this case it was invaluable. Numbers of
persons whom none of us had known or heard of in Russia--absolute
strangers to the circles--came to Geneva, and many of them, a few days
or even hours after their arrival, stood on the most friendly terms
with the colony of refugees; but in some way or another the spies
never succeeded in crossing the threshold of familiarity. A spy might
make common acquaintances; he might give the best accounts, sometimes
correct, of his past in Russia; he might possess in perfection
the nihilist slang and manners, but he never could assimilate the
particular kind of nihilist ethics which had grown up amongst the
Russian youth--and this alone kept him at a distance from our colony.
Spies can imitate anything else but those ethics.

When I was working with Reclus there was at Clarens one such
individual, from whom we all kept aloof. We knew nothing bad about him,
but we felt that he was not ‘ours,’ and as he tried only the more to
penetrate into our society, we became suspicious of him. I had never
said a word to him, and consequently he was especially after me. Seeing
that he could not approach me through the usual channels, he began to
write me letters, giving me mysterious appointments for mysterious
purposes in the woods and in similar places. For fun, I once accepted
his invitation and went to the spot, with a good friend following me
at a distance; but the man, who probably had a confederate, must have
noticed that I was not alone, and did not appear. So I was spared the
pleasure of ever saying to him a single word. Besides, I worked at that
time so hard that every minute of my time was taken up either with
the Geography or ‘Le Révolté,’ and I entered into no conspiracies.
However, we learned later on that this man used to send to the Third
Section detailed reports about the supposed conversations which he had
had with me, my supposed confidences, and the terrible plots which I
was concocting at St. Petersburg against the Tsar’s life! All that
was taken for ready money at St. Petersburg. And in Italy, too. When
Cafiero was arrested one day in Switzerland, he was shown formidable
reports of Italian spies, who warned their government that Cafiero and
I, loaded with bombs, were going to enter Italy. The fact was that I
never was in Italy, and never had had any intention of visiting the
country.

       *       *       *       *       *

In point of fact, however, the spies do not always fabricate reports
wholesale. They often tell things that are true, but all depends upon
the way a story is told. We passed some merry moments about a report
which was addressed to the French government by a French spy who
followed my wife and myself as we were travelling in 1881 from Paris
to London. The spy, probably playing a double part--as they often
do--had sold that report to Rochefort, who published it in his paper.
Everything that the spy had told in this report was correct--but the
way he had told it!

He wrote for instance: ‘I took the next compartment to the one that
Kropótkin had taken with his wife.’ Quite true; he was there. We
noticed him, for he had managed at once to attract our attention by his
sullen, unpleasant face. ‘They spoke Russian all the time, in order
not to be understood by the other passengers.’ Very true again: we
spoke Russian as we always do. ‘When they came to Calais, they both
took a _bouillon_.’ Most correct again: we took a _bouillon_. But here
the mysterious part of the journey begins. ‘After that, they both
suddenly disappeared, and I looked for them in vain, on the platform
and elsewhere; and when they reappeared, he was in disguise, and was
followed by a Russian priest, who never left him until they reached
London, where I lost sight of the priest.’ All that was true again. My
wife had a slight toothache, and I asked the keeper of the restaurant
to let us go into his private room, where the tooth could be stopped.
So we had disappeared indeed; and as we had to cross the Channel, I
put my soft felt hat into my pocket and put on a fur cap: so I was ‘in
disguise.’ As to the mysterious priest, he was also there. He was not a
Russian, but this is irrelevant: he wore at any rate the dress of the
Greek priests. I saw him standing at the counter and asking something
which no one understood. ‘Agua, agua,’ he repeated in a woful tone.
‘Give the gentleman a glass of water,’ I said to the waiter. Whereupon
the priest began to thank me for my intervention with a truly Eastern
effusion. My wife took pity on him and spoke to him in different
languages, but he understood none but modern Greek. It appeared at last
that he knew a few words in one of the South Slavonian languages, and
we could make out: ‘I am a Greek; Turkish embassy, London.’ We told
him, mostly by signs, that we too were going to London, and that he
might travel with us.

The most amusing part of the story was that I really found for him the
address of the Turkish embassy, even before we had reached Charing
Cross. The train stopped at some station on the way, and two elegant
ladies entered our already full third-class compartment. Both had
newspapers in their hands. One was English, and the other--a tall,
nice-looking person, who spoke good French--pretended to be English.
After having exchanged a few words, she asked me _à brûle-pourpoint_:
‘What do you think of Count Ignátieff?’ And immediately after that:
‘Are you soon going to kill the new Tsar?’ I was clear as to her
profession from these two questions; but, thinking of my priest, I said
to her: ‘Do you happen to know the address of the Turkish embassy?’
‘Street So-and so, number So-and-so,’ she replied without hesitation,
like a schoolgirl in a class. ‘You could, I suppose, also give the
address of the Russian embassy?’ I asked her, and the address having
been given with the same readiness, I communicated both to the priest.
When we reached Charing Cross, the lady was so obsequiously anxious
to attend to my luggage, and even to carry a heavy package herself
with her gloved hands, that I finally told her, much to her surprise:
‘Enough of that; ladies do not carry gentlemen’s luggage. Go away!’

But to return to my trustworthy French spy. ‘He alighted at Charing
Cross’--he wrote in his report--‘but for more than half an hour after
the arrival of the train he did not leave the station, until he had
ascertained that everyone else had left it. I kept aloof in the
meantime, concealing myself behind a pillar. Having ascertained that
all passengers had left the platform, they both suddenly jumped into a
cab. I followed them nevertheless, and overheard the address which the
cabman gave at the gate to the policeman--12, street So-and-so--and ran
after the cab. There were no cabs in the neighbourhood; so I ran up
to Trafalgar Square, where I got one. I then drove after him, and he
alighted at the above address.’

All facts in this narrative are true again--the address and the rest;
but how mysterious it all reads. I had warned a Russian friend of
my arrival, but there was a dense fog that morning, and my friend
overslept himself. We waited for him half an hour, and then, leaving
our luggage in the cloak-room, drove to his house.

‘There they sat till two o’clock with drawn curtains, and then a tall
man came out of the house, and returned one hour later with their
luggage.’ Even the remark about the curtains was correct: we had to
light the gas on account of the fog, and drew down the curtains to get
rid of the ugly sight of a small Islington street wrapped in a dense
fog.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I was working with Elisée Reclus at Clarens I used to go every
fortnight to Geneva to see to the bringing out of ‘Le Révolté.’
One day as I came to our printing office, I was told that a Russian
gentleman wanted to see me. He had already seen my friends and had
told them that he came to induce me to start a paper like ‘Le Révolté’
in Russian. He offered for that purpose all the money that might be
required. I went to meet him in a café, where he gave me a German
name--Tohnlehm, let us say--and told me that he was a native of the
Baltic provinces. He boasted of possessing a large fortune in certain
estates and manufactures, and he was extremely angry with the Russian
Government, for their Russianizing schemes. On the whole he produced
a somewhat indefinite impression, so that my friends insisted upon my
accepting his offer; but I did not much like the man from first sight.

From the café he took me to his rooms in an hotel, and there began to
show less reserve and to appear more like himself and in a still more
unpleasant light. ‘Don’t doubt my fortune,’ he said to me; ‘I have
made a capital invention. There’s a lot of money in it. I shall patent
it, and get a considerable sum for it, and give it all for the cause
of the revolution in Russia.’ And he showed me, to my astonishment, a
miserable candlestick, the originality of which was that it was awfully
ugly and had three bits of wire to put the candle in. The poorest
housewife would not have cared for such a candlestick, and even if it
could have been patented, no ironmonger would have paid the patentee
more than a couple of sovereigns. ‘A rich man placing his hopes on such
a candlestick! This man,’ I thought to myself, ‘can never have seen
better ones,’ and my opinion about him was made up: ‘He was no rich man
at all, and the money he offered was not his own.’ So I bluntly told
him: ‘Very well, if you are so anxious to have a Russian revolutionary
paper, and hold the flattering opinion about myself which you have
expressed, you will have to put your money in my name at a bank, and
at my entire disposal. But I warn you that you will have absolutely
nothing to do with the paper.’ ‘Of course, of course,’ he said, ‘but
just see to it, and sometimes advise you, and aid you in smuggling it
into Russia.’ ‘No, nothing of the sort! You need not see me at all.’ My
friends thought that I was too hard upon the man, but some time after
that a letter was received from St. Petersburg warning us that we would
have the visit of a spy of the Third Section--Tohnlehm by name. The
candlestick had thus rendered us a good service.

       *       *       *       *       *

Candlesticks, or anything else, these people almost always betray
themselves in one way or another. When we were at London in 1881 we
received, on a foggy morning, the visit of two Russians. I knew one
of them by name; the other, a young man whom he recommended as his
friend, was a stranger. He had volunteered to accompany his friend on
a few days’ visit to England. As he was introduced by a friend, I had
no suspicions whatever about him; but I was very busy that day with
some work, and asked another friend who stayed close by to find them
rooms and to take them about to see London. My wife had not yet seen
London either, and she went with them. In the afternoon she returned
saying to me: ‘Do you know, I dislike that man very much. Beware of
him.’ ‘But why? What’s the matter?’ I asked. ‘Nothing, absolutely
nothing; but he is surely not “ours.” By the way he treated the waiter
in a café, and the way he handles money, I saw at once that he is not
“ours,” and if he is not--why should he come to us?’ She was so certain
of her suspicions that, while she performed her duties of hospitality,
she nevertheless managed never to leave that young man alone in my
study, even for one minute. We had a chat, and the visitor began to
exhibit himself more and more under such a low moral aspect that even
his friend blushed for him, and when I asked more details about him,
the explanations he gave were even still less satisfactory. We were
both on our guard. In short, they both left London in a couple of
days, and a fortnight later I got a letter from my Russian friend,
full of excuses for having introduced to me the young man who, they
had found out, at Paris, was a spy in the service of the Russian
embassy. I looked then into a list of Russian secret service agents
in France and Switzerland which we, the refugees, had received lately
from the Executive Committee--they had their men everywhere at St.
Petersburg--and I found the name of that young man on the list, with
one letter only altered in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

To start a paper, subsidized by the police, with a police agent at its
head, is an old plan, and the prefect of the Paris police, Andrieux,
resorted to it in 1881. I was with Elisée Reclus in the mountains
when we received a letter from a Frenchman, or rather a Belgian, who
announced to us that he was going to start an anarchist paper at
Paris and asked our collaboration. The letter, full of flatteries,
produced upon us an unpleasant impression, and Reclus had moreover
some vague reminiscence of having heard the name of the writer in some
unfavourable connection. We decided to refuse collaboration, and I
wrote to a Paris friend that we must first of all ascertain from whence
the money came with which the paper was going to be started. ‘It may
come from the Orleanists--an old trick of the family--and we must know
its origin.’ My Paris friend, with a workman’s straightforwardness,
read that letter at a meeting at which the would-be editor of the paper
was present. He simulated offence, and I had to answer several letters
on this subject; but I stuck to my words: ‘If the man is in earnest, he
must show us the origin of the money.’

And so he did at last. Pressed by questions he said that the money
came from his aunt--a rich lady of antiquated opinions who yielded,
however, to his fancy of having a paper and had parted with the money.
The lady was not in France; she was staying at London. We insisted
nevertheless upon having her name and address, and our friend Malatesta
volunteered to see her. He went with an Italian friend who was
connected with the second-hand trade in furniture. They found the lady
occupying a small flat, and while Malatesta spoke to her and was more
and more convinced that she was simply playing the aunt’s part in the
comedy, the furniture-friend, looking round at the chairs and tables,
discovered that all of them had been taken the day before--probably
hired--from a second-hand furniture dealer, his neighbour. The labels
of the dealer were still fastened to the chairs and the tables.
This did not prove much, but naturally reinforced our suspicions. I
absolutely refused to have anything to do with the paper.

The paper was of an unheard-of violence. Burning, assassination,
dynamite bombs--there was nothing but that in it. I met the man,
the editor of the paper, as I went to the London congress, and the
moment I saw his sullen face, and heard a bit of his talk, and caught
a glance of the sort of women with whom he always went about, my
opinions concerning him were settled. At the congress, during which he
introduced all sorts of terrible resolutions, the delegates kept aloof
from him; and when he insisted upon having the addresses of anarchists
all over the world, the refusal was made in anything but a flattering
manner.

To make a long story short, he was unmasked a couple of months later,
and the paper was stopped for ever on the very next day. Then, a couple
of years after that, the prefect of police, Andrieux, published his
‘Memoirs,’ and in this book he told all about the paper which he had
started and the explosions which his agents had organized at Paris,
by putting sardine boxes filled with ‘something’ under the statue of
Thiers.

One can imagine the quantities of money all these things cost the
French and every other nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

I might write several chapters on this subject, but I will mention only
one more story of two adventurers at Clairvaux.

My wife stayed in the only inn of the little village which has grown
up under the shadow of the prison wall. One day the landlady entered
her room with a message from two gentlemen, who came to the hotel and
wanted to see my wife. The landlady interceded with all her eloquence
in their favour. ‘Oh, I know the world,’ she said, ‘and I may assure
you, madame, that they are the most correct gentlemen. Nothing could be
more _comme-il-faut_. One of them gave the name of a German officer.
He is surely a baron or a “milord,” and the other is his interpreter.
They know you perfectly well. The baron is going now to Africa, perhaps
never to return, and he wants to see you before he leaves.’

My wife looked at the address of the message, which was: ‘A Madame
la Principesse Kropotkine,’ and needed no further proof of the
_comme-el-faut_ of the two gentlemen. As to the contents of the
message, they were even worse than the address. Against all rules
of grammar and common-sense the ‘baron’ wrote about a mysterious
communication which he had to make. She refused point-blank to receive
the baron and his interpreter.

Thereupon the baron wrote to my wife letter upon letter, which she
returned unopened. All the village soon became divided into two
parties--one siding with the baron and led by the landlady, and the
other against him, and headed, as a matter of fact, by the landlady’s
husband. Quite a romance was circulated. ‘The baron had known my wife
before her marriage. He had danced with her many times at the Russian
embassy in Vienna. He was still in love with her, but she, the cruel
one, refused even to allow him to cast a glance at her before he went
upon his perilous expedition....’

Then came the mysterious story of a boy whom we were said to conceal.
‘Where is their boy?’ the baron wanted to know. ‘They have a son, six
years old by this time--where is he?’ ‘She never would part with a boy
if she had one,’ the one party said. ‘Yes, they have one, but they
conceal him,’ the other party maintained.

For us two, this contest was a very interesting revelation. It proved
that our letters were not only read by the prison authorities, but that
their contents were made known to the Russian embassy as well. When I
was at Lyons, and my wife went to see Elisée Reclus in Switzerland,
she wrote to me once that ‘our boy’ was going on well; his health was
excellent, and they all spent a very nice evening at the anniversary
of his fifth birthday. I knew that she meant ‘Le Révolté,’ which we
often used to name in conversation ‘our _gamin_’--our naughty boy. But
now that these gentlemen were inquiring about ‘our _gamin_,’ and even
designated so correctly his age, it was evident that the letter had
passed through other hands than those of the governor. It was well to
know such a thing.

Nothing escapes the attention of village folk in the country, and the
baron soon awakened suspicions. He wrote a new letter to my wife, even
more loquacious than the former ones. Now, he asked her pardon for
having tried to introduce himself as an acquaintance. He owned that she
did not know him; but nevertheless he was a well-wisher. He had to make
to her a most important communication. My life was in danger and he
wanted to warn her. The baron and his secretary took an outing in the
fields to read together that letter and to consult about its tenor--the
forest-guard following them at a distance--but they quarrelled about
it, and the letter was torn to pieces and thrown in the fields. The
forester waited till they were out of sight, gathered the pieces,
connected them, and read the letter. In one hour’s time the village
knew that the baron had never really been acquainted with my wife;
the romance which was so sentimentally repeated by the baron’s party
crumbled to pieces.

‘Ah, then, they are not what they pretended to be,’ the _brigadier
de gendarmerie_ concluded in his turn; ‘then they must be German
spies’--and he arrested them.

It must be said in his excuse that a German spy had really been at
Clairvaux shortly before. In time of war the vast buildings of the
prison might serve as depôts for provisions or barracks for the army,
and the German General Staff was surely interested to know the inner
capacity of the prison buildings. A jovial travelling photographer came
accordingly to our village, made friends with everyone by photographing
them for nothing, and was admitted to photograph, not only the inside
of the prison yards, but also the dormitories. Having done this, he
travelled to some other town on the eastern frontier, and was there
arrested by the French authorities as a man found in possession
of compromising military documents. The brigadier, fresh from the
impression of the photographer’s visit, jumped to the conclusion that
the baron and his secretary were also German spies, and took them in
custody to the little town of Bar-sur-Aube. There they were released
next morning, the local paper stating that they were not German spies
but ‘persons commissioned by another more friendly power.’

Now public opinion turned entirely against the baron and his secretary,
who had to live through more adventures. After their release they
entered a small village café, and there ventilated their griefs in
German in a friendly conversation over a bottle of wine. ‘You were
stupid, you were a coward,’ the would-be interpreter said to the
would-be baron. ‘If _I_ had been in your place, I would have shot that
examining magistrate with this revolver. Let him only repeat that with
_me_--he will have these bullets in his head!’ And so on.

A commercial traveller who quietly sat in the corner of the room,
rushed at once to the brigadier to report the conversation which he
had overheard. The brigadier made at once an official report, and once
more arrested the secretary--a pharmacist from Strasburg. He was taken
before a police court at the same town of Bar-sur-Aube, and got a full
month’s imprisonment for ‘menaces uttered against a magistrate in a
public place.’ At last the two adventurers left Clairvaux.

       *       *       *       *       *

These spy adventures ended in a comical way. But how many
tragedies--terrible tragedies--we owe to these villains! Precious
lives lost, and whole families wrecked, simply to get an easy living
for such swindlers. When one thinks of the thousands of spies going
about the world in the pay of all governments; of the traps they lay
for all sorts of artless people; of the lives they sometimes bring
to a tragical end, and the sorrows they sow broadcast; of the vast
sums of money thrown away in the maintenance of that army recruited
from the scum of society; of the corruption of all sorts which they
pour into society at large, nay, even into families, one cannot but
be appalled at the immensity of the evil which is thus done. And this
army of villains is not only limited to those who play the spy on
revolutionists or to the military espionage system. In this country
there are papers, especially in the watering towns, whose columns
are covered with advertisements of private detective agencies which
undertake to collect all sorts of information for divorce suits, to spy
upon husbands for their wives and upon wives for their husbands, to
penetrate into families and entrap simpletons, and who will undertake
anything which may be asked of them, for a corresponding sum of money.
And while people feel scandalized at the espionage villainies lately
revealed in the highest military spheres of France, they do not notice
that amongst themselves, perhaps under their own roofs, the same and
even worse things are being committed by both the official and private
detective agencies.

XV

Demands for our release were continually raised, both in the Press and
in the Chamber of Deputies--the more so as about the same time that we
were condemned Louise Michel was condemned, too--for robbery. Louise
Michel, who always gives literally her last shawl or cloak to the woman
who is in need of it, and who never could be compelled, during her
imprisonment, to have better food, because she always gave her fellow
prisoners what was sent to her, was condemned, together with another
comrade, Pouget, to nine years’ imprisonment for highway robbery! That
sounded too bad even for the middle-class opportunists. She marched
one day at the head of a procession of the unemployed, and, entering
a baker’s shop, took a few loaves from it and distributed them to the
hungry column: this was her robbery. The release of the anarchists
thus became a war-cry against the government, and in the autumn of
1885 all my comrades save three were set at liberty by a decree of
President Grévy. Then the outcry on behalf of Louise Michel and myself
became still louder. However, Alexander III. objected to it; and one
day the prime minister, M. Freycinet, answering an interpellation in
the Chamber, said that ‘diplomatic difficulties stood in the way of
Kropótkin’s release.’ Strange words in the mouth of the prime minister
of an independent country; but still stranger words have been heard
since in connection with that ill-omened alliance of France with
imperial Russia.

At last, in the middle of January 1886, both Louise Michel and Pouget,
as well as the four of us who were still at Clairvaux, were set free.

We went to Paris and stayed there for a few weeks with our friend, Elie
Reclus--a writer of great power in anthropology, who is often mistaken
outside France for his younger brother, the geographer, Elisée. A close
friendship has united the two brothers from early youth. When the time
came for them to enter a university, they went from a small country
place in the valley of the Gironde to Strasburg, making the journey
on foot--accompanied, as true wandering students, by their dog; and
when they stayed at some village it was the dog which got his bowl of
soup, while the two brothers’ supper very often consisted of bread
only, with a few apples. From Strasburg the younger brother went to
Berlin, whereto he was attracted by the lectures of the great Ritter.
Later on, in the forties, they were both at Paris. Elie Reclus became a
convinced Fourierist, and both saw in the republic of 1848 the coming
of a new era of social evolution. Consequently, after Napoleon III.’s
_coup d’état_, they both had to leave France, and emigrated to England.
When the amnesty was voted, and they returned to Paris, Elie edited
there a Fourierist co-operative paper which was widely spread among the
workers. It is not generally known, but may be interesting to note,
that Napoleon III.--who played the part of a Cæsar, interested, as
behoves a Cæsar, in the conditions of the working classes--used to send
one of his aides-de-camp to the printing office of the paper, each time
it was printed, to take to the Tuileries the first sheet issued from
the press. He was, later on, even ready to patronize the International
Workingmen’s Association, on the condition that it should put in one of
its reports a few words of confidence in the great socialist plans of
the Cæsar; and he ordered its prosecution when the Internationalists
refused point-blank to do anything of the sort.

When the Commune was proclaimed, both brothers heartily joined it and
Elie accepted the post of keeper of the National Library and the Louvre
museum under Vaillant. It was, to a great extent, to his foresight
and to his hard work that we owe the preservation of the invaluable
treasures of human knowledge and art accumulated in these two
institutions; otherwise they would have perished during the bombardment
of Paris by the armies of Thiers, and the subsequent conflagration. A
passionate lover of Greek art, and profoundly acquainted with it, he
had had all the most precious statues and vases of the Louvre packed
and stored in the caves, while the greatest precautions were taken to
protect the building of the National Library from the conflagration
which raged round it. His wife, a courageous, worthy companion of
the philosopher, followed in the streets by her two little boys,
organized in the meantime in her own quarter of the town the feeding
of the population which had been reduced to sheer destitution by a
second siege. During the final few weeks of its existence, the Commune
at last realized that a supply of food to the population, which was
deprived of the means of earning it for itself, ought to have been the
Commune’s first duty, and volunteers organized the relief. It was by
mere accident that Elie Reclus, who had kept to his post till the last
moment, escaped being shot by the Versailles troops; and a sentence
of deportation having been pronounced upon him--for having dared to
accept so necessary a service under the Commune--he went with his
family into exile. Now, on his return to Paris, he had resumed the
work of his life--ethnology. What this work is may be judged from a
few, very few, chapters of it published in book form under the title
of ‘Primitive Folk’ and ‘The Australians,’ as well as from the history
of the origin of religions, which he now lectures upon at the _École
des Hautes Études_, at Brussels--a foundation of his brother. In the
whole of the ethnological literature there are not many works imbued
to the same extent with a thorough and sympathetic understanding of the
true nature of primitive man. As to his ‘Origin of Religions’ (which is
being published in the review, ‘Société Nouvelle,’ and its continuation
‘Humanité Nouvelle’), it is, I venture to say, the best work on the
subject that has been published--undoubtedly superior to Herbert
Spencer’s attempt in the same direction, because Herbert Spencer, with
all his immense intellect, does not possess that understanding of
the artless and simple nature of the primitive man which Elie Reclus
possesses to a rare perfection, and to which he has added an extremely
wide knowledge of a rather underrated branch of folk-psychology--the
evolution and transformation of beliefs. It is needless to speak of
Elie Reclus’s infinite good nature and modesty, or of his superior
intelligence and vast knowledge of all subjects relating to humanity;
it is all comprehended in his style. With his unbounded modesty, his
calm manner and his deep philosophical insight, he is the type of the
Greek philosopher of antiquity. In a society less fond of patented
tuition and of piecemeal instruction, and more appreciative of the
development of wide humanitarian conceptions, he would be surrounded by
flocks of pupils, like one of his Greek prototypes.

A very animated socialist and anarchist movement was going on at Paris
while we stayed there. Louise Michel lectured every night, and aroused
the enthusiasm of her audiences, whether they consisted of working men
or were made up of middle-class people. Her already great popularity
became still greater and spread even amongst the university students,
who might hate advanced ideas but worshipped in her the ideal woman;
so much so that a riot, caused by someone speaking disrespectfully of
Louise Michel in the presence of students, took place one day in a
café. The young people took up her defence and made a fearful uproar,
smashing all the tables and glasses in the café. I also lectured once
on anarchism, before an audience of several thousand people, and left
Paris immediately after that lecture, before the government could obey
the injunctions of the reactionary and the pro-Russian press, which
insisted upon my being expelled from France.

From Paris we went to London, where I found once more my two old
friends, Stepniák and Tchaykóvsky. The socialist movement was in full
swing, and life in London was no more the dull, vegetating existence
that it had been for me four years before.

We settled in a small cottage at Harrow. We cared little about the
furniture of our cottage, a good part of which I made myself with the
aid of Tchaykóvsky--he had been in the meantime in the United States
and had learned some carpentering--but we rejoiced immensely at having
a small plot of heavy Middlesex clay in our garden. My wife and myself
went with much enthusiasm into small culture, the admirable results
of which I began to realize after having made acquaintance with the
writings of Toubeau, and some Paris _maraîchers_ (gardeners), and
after our own experiment in the prison garden at Clairvaux. As for my
wife, who had typhoid fever soon after we settled at Harrow, the work
in the garden during the period of convalescence was more completely
restorative for her than a stay at the very best sanatorium.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the end of the summer a heavy stroke fell upon us. We learned that
my brother Alexander was no longer alive.

During the years that I had been abroad before my imprisonment in
France, we had never corresponded with each other. In the eyes of
the Russian government, to love a brother who is persecuted for his
political opinions is in itself a sin. To maintain relations with
him after he has become a refugee is a crime. A subject of the Tsar
must hate all the rebels against the supreme ruler’s authority--and
Alexander was in the clutches of the Russian police. I persistently
refused therefore to write to him or to any of my relatives. After the
Tsar had written on the petition of our sister Hélène, ‘Let him remain
there,’ there was no hope of a speedy release for my brother. Two years
after that, a committee was nominated to settle terms for those who
had been exiled to Siberia without judgment for an undetermined time,
and my brother got five years. That made seven with the two years he
had already been kept there. Then a new committee was nominated under
Lóris Mélikoff, and added another five years. My brother was thus to be
liberated in October 1886. That made twelve years of exile, first in
a tiny town of East Siberia, and afterwards at Tomsk--that is in the
lowlands of West Siberia, where he had not even the dry and healthy
climate of the high prairies farther East.

When I was imprisoned at Clairvaux, he wrote to me, and we exchanged a
few letters. He wrote that as our letters would be read by the Russian
police in Siberia and by the French prison authorities in France, we
might as well write to each other under this double supervision. He
spoke of his family life, of his three children whom he characterized
admirably well, and of his work. He earnestly advised me to keep a
watchful eye upon the development of science in Italy, where excellent
and original researches are made, but remain unknown in the scientific
world until they have been re-manufactured in Germany; and he gave me
his opinions about the probable march of political life in Russia.
He did not believe in the possibility with us in a near future, of
constitutional rule on the pattern of the West European parliaments;
but he looked forward--and found it quite sufficient for the moment--to
the convocation of a sort of deliberative National Assembly (_Zémskiy
Sobór_ or _Etats Généraux_). It would not vote new laws, but would
only work out the schemes of laws to which the imperial power and
the Council of State would give their definitive form and the final
sanction.

Above all he wrote to me about his scientific work. He always had a
decided leaning towards astronomy, and when we were at St. Petersburg
he had published in Russia an excellent summary of all our knowledge of
the shooting stars. With his fine critical mind he soon saw the strong
or the weak points of different hypotheses; and without sufficient
knowledge of mathematics, but endowed with a powerful imagination, he
succeeded in grasping the results of the most intricate mathematical
researches. Living with his imagination amongst the moving celestial
bodies, he realized their complex movements often better than some
mathematicians--especially the pure algebraists--realize them, because
they often lose sight of the realities of the physical world to see
only the formulæ and their logical connections. Our St. Petersburg
astronomers spoke to me with great appreciation of that work of my
brother. Now he undertook to study the structure of the universe:
to analyze the data and the hypotheses about the worlds of suns,
star-clusters, and nebulæ in the infinite space, and to disentangle
their probable grouping, their life, and the laws of their evolution
and decay. The Púlkova astronomer, Gyldén, spoke highly of this new
work of Alexander, and introduced him by correspondence to Mr. Holden
in the United States, from whom I had lately the pleasure of hearing,
at Washington, an appreciative estimate of my brother’s researches.
Science is greatly in need, from time to time, of such scientific
speculations of a higher standard, made by a scrupulously laborious,
critical, and at the same time, imaginative mind.

But in a small town of Siberia, far away from all the libraries, unable
to follow the progress of science, he had only succeeded in embodying
in his work the researches which had been done up to the date of his
exile. Some capital work had been done since--he knew it--but how could
he get access to the necessary books so long as he remained in Siberia?
The approach of the term of his liberation did not inspire him with
hope either. He knew that he would not be allowed to stay in any of the
university towns of Russia or of Western Europe, but that his exile to
Siberia would be followed by a second exile, perhaps even worse than
the first, to some hamlet of Eastern Russia.

Despair took possession of him. ‘A despair like Faust’s takes hold
of me at times,’ he wrote to me. When the time of his liberation was
coming, he sent his wife and children to Russia, taking advantage of
one of the last steamers before the close of the navigation, and, on a
gloomy night, the despair of Faust put an end to his life....

       *       *       *       *       *

A dark cloud hung upon our cottage for many months--until a flash of
light pierced it. It came next Spring, when a tiny being, a girl who
bears my brother’s name, came into the world, and at whose helpless cry
I overheard in my heart quite new chords vibrating.

XVI

In 1886 the socialist movement in England was in full swing. Large
bodies of workers had openly joined it in all the principal towns, as
well as a number of middle-class people, chiefly young, who helped it
in different ways. An acute industrial crisis prevailed that year in
most trades, and every morning, and often all the day long, I heard
groups of workers going about in the streets singing ‘We’ve got no work
to do,’ or some hymn, and begging for bread. People flocked at night
into Trafalgar Square to sleep there in the open air, under the wind
and rain, between two newspapers; and one day in February a crowd,
after having listened to the speeches of Burns, Hyndman, and Champion,
rushed into Piccadilly and broke a few windows in the great shops.
Far more important, however, than this outbreak of discontent, was
the spirit which prevailed amongst the poorer portion of the working
population in the outskirts of London. It was such that if the leaders
of the movement, who were prosecuted for the riots, had received severe
sentences, a spirit of hatred and revenge, hitherto unknown in the
recent history of the labour movement in England, but the symptoms of
which were very well marked in 1886, would have been developed, and
would have impressed its stamp upon the subsequent movement for a long
time to come. However, the middle classes seemed to have realized the
danger. Considerable sums of money were immediately subscribed in the
West End for the relief of misery in the East End--certainly quite
inadequate to relieve a widely spread destitution, but sufficient to
show, at least, good intentions. As to the sentences which were passed
upon the prosecuted leaders, they were limited to two and three months’
imprisonment.

The amount of interest in socialism and all sorts of schemes of reform
and reconstruction of society was very great in all layers of society.
Beginning with the autumn and throughout the winter, I was asked to
lecture over the country, partly on prisons, but mainly on anarchist
socialism, and I visited in this way nearly every large town of England
and Scotland. As I had, as a rule, accepted the first invitation I
received to stay the night after the lecture, it consequently happened
that I stayed one night in a rich man’s mansion, and the next night in
the narrow abode of a working family. Every night I saw considerable
numbers of people of all classes; and whether it was in the worker’s
small parlour, or in the reception-rooms of the wealthy, the most
animated discussions went on about socialism and anarchism till a late
hour of the night--with hope in the workman’s home, with apprehension
in the mansion, but everywhere with the same earnestness.

In the mansions, the main question was to know, ‘What do the socialists
want? What do they intend to do?’ and next, ‘What are the concessions
which it is absolutely necessary to make at some given moment in order
to avoid serious conflicts?’ In these conversations I seldom heard the
justice of the socialist contention merely denied, or described as
sheer nonsense. But I found also a firm conviction that a revolution
was impossible in England; that the claims of the mass of the workers
had not yet reached the precision nor the extent of the claims of the
socialists, and that the workers would be satisfied with much less;
so that secondary concessions, amounting to a prospect of a slight
increase of well-being or of leisure, would be accepted by the working
classes of England as a pledge in the meantime of still more in the
future. ‘We are a left-centre country, we live by compromises,’ I was
once told by an old member of Parliament, who had had a wide experience
of the life of his mother country.

In workmen’s dwellings too, I noticed a difference in the questions
which were addressed to me in England to those which I was asked on
the Continent. General principles, of which the partial applications
will be determined by the principles themselves, deeply interest
the Latin workers. If this or that municipal council votes funds in
support of a strike, or organizes the feeding of the children at the
schools, no importance is attached to such steps. They are taken as
a matter of fact. ‘Of course, a hungry child cannot learn,’ a French
worker says. ‘It must be fed.’ ‘Of course, the employer was wrong
in forcing the workers to strike.’ This is all that is said, and no
praise is given on account of such minor concessions by the present
individualist society to communist principles. The thought of the
worker goes beyond the period of such concessions, and he asks whether
it is the Commune, or the unions of workers, or the State which ought
to undertake the organization of production; whether free agreement
alone will be sufficient to maintain Society in working order, and
what would be the moral restraint if Society parted with its present
repressive agencies; whether an elected democratic government would be
capable of accomplishing serious changes in the socialist direction,
and whether accomplished facts ought not to precede legislation? and
so on. In England, it was upon a series of palliative concessions,
gradually growing in importance, that the chief weight was laid.
But, on the other hand, the impossibility of state administration of
industries seemed to have been settled long ago in the workers’ minds,
and what chiefly interested most of them were matters of constructive
realization, as well as how to attain the conditions which would make
such a realization possible. ‘Well, Kropótkin, suppose that to-morrow
we were to take possession of the docks of our town. What’s your idea
about how to manage them?’ I would, for instance, be asked as soon as
we had sat down in a small workman’s parlour. Or, ‘We don’t like the
idea of state management of railways, and the present management by
private companies is organized robbery. But suppose the workers owned
all the railways. How could the working of them be organized?’ The lack
of general ideas was thus supplemented by a desire of going deeper into
the details of the realities.

Another feature of the movement in England was the considerable number
of middle-class people who gave it their support in different ways,
some of them frankly joining it, while others helped it from the
outside. In France or in Switzerland, the two parties--the workers and
the middle classes--not only stood arrayed against each other, but were
sharply separated. So it was, at least, in the years 1876-85. When I
was in Switzerland I could say that during my three or four years’ stay
in the country I was acquainted with none but workers--I hardly knew
more than a couple of middle-class men. In England this would have been
impossible. We found quite a number of middle-class men and women who
did not hesitate to appear openly, both in London and in the provinces,
as helpers in organizing socialist meetings, or in going about during
a strike with boxes to collect coppers in the parks. Besides, we saw a
movement, similar to what we had had in Russia in the early seventies,
when our youth rushed ‘to the people,’ though by no means so intense,
so full of self-sacrifice, and so utterly devoid of the idea of
‘charity.’ Here also, in England, a number of people went in all sorts
of capacities to live near to the workers: in the slums, in people’s
palaces, in Toynbee Hall, and the like. It must be said that there was
a great deal of enthusiasm at that time. Many probably thought that
a social revolution had commenced, like the hero of Morris’s comical
play, ‘Tables Turned,’ who says that the revolution is not simply
coming, but has already begun. As always happens however with such
enthusiasts, when they saw that in England, as everywhere, there was a
long, tedious, preparatory, uphill work that had to be done, very many
of them retired from active propaganda, and now stand outside of it as
mere sympathetic onlookers.

XVII

I took a lively part in this movement, and with a few English comrades
we started, in addition to the three socialist papers already in
existence, an anarchist-communist monthly, ‘Freedom,’ which continues
to live up to the present day. At the same time I resumed my work on
anarchism where I had had to interrupt it at the moment of my arrest.
The critical part of it was published during my Clairvaux imprisonment
by Elisée Reclus, under the title of ‘Paroles d’un Révolté.’ Now I
began to work out the constructive part of an anarchist-communist
society--so far as it can now be forecast--in a series of articles
published at Paris in ‘La Révolté.’ Our ‘boy,’ ‘Le Révolté,’ prosecuted
for anti-militarist propaganda, was compelled to change its title-page
and now appeared under a feminine name. Later on these articles were
published in a more elaborate form in a book, ‘La Conquête du Pain.’

These researches caused me to study more thoroughly certain points of
the economic life of our present civilized nations. Most socialists
had hitherto said that in our present civilized societies we actually
produce much more than is necessary for guaranteeing full well-being
to all. It is only the distribution which is defective; and if a
social revolution took place, nothing more would be required than
for everyone to return to his factory or workshop, Society taking
possession for itself of the ‘surplus value’ or benefits which now
go to the capitalist. I thought, on the contrary, that under the
present conditions of private ownership production itself had taken
a wrong turn, so as to neglect, and often to prevent, the production
of the very necessaries for life on a sufficient scale. None of these
are produced in greater quantities than would be required to secure
well-being for all; and the over-production, so often spoken of, means
nothing but that the masses are too poor to buy even what is now
considered as necessary for a decent existence. But in all civilized
countries the production, both agricultural and industrial, ought
to and easily might be immensely increased so as to secure a reign
of plenty for all. This brought me to consider the possibilities of
modern agriculture, as well as those of an education which would give
to everyone the possibility of carrying on at the same time both
enjoyable manual work and brain work. I developed these ideas in a
series of articles in the ‘Nineteenth Century,’ which are now published
as a book under the title of ‘Fields, Factories, and Workshops.’

Another great question also engrossed my attention. It is known to what
conclusions Darwin’s formula, ‘The Struggle for Existence,’ had been
developed by most of his followers, even the most intelligent of them,
such as Huxley. There is no infamy in civilized society, or in the
relations of the whites towards the so-called lower races, or of the
‘strong’ towards the ‘weak,’ which would not have found its excuse in
this formula.

Already during my stay at Clairvaux I saw the necessity of completely
revising the formula itself of ‘struggle for existence’ in the animal
world, and its applications to human affairs. The attempts which had
been made by a few socialists in this direction had not satisfied
me, when I found in a lecture of a Russian zoologist, Prof. Kessler,
a true expression of the law of struggle for life. ‘Mutual aid,’ he
said in that lecture, ‘is as much a law of nature as mutual struggle;
but for the _progressive_ evolution of the species the former is
far more important than the latter.’ These few words--confirmed
unfortunately by only a couple of illustrations (to which Syévertsoff,
the zoologist of whom I have spoken in an earlier chapter, added one or
two more)--contained for me the key of the whole problem. When Huxley
published in 1888 his atrocious article, ‘The Struggle for Existence:
a Program,’ I decided to put in a readable form my objections to his
way of understanding the struggle for life, among animals as well as
among men, the materials for which I had accumulated during a couple
of years. I spoke of it to my friends. However, I found that the
comprehension of ‘struggle for life’ in the sense of a war-cry of
‘Woe to the weak,’ raised to the height of a commandment of nature
revealed by science, was so deeply inrooted in this country that it
had become almost a matter of religion. Two persons only supported me
in my revolt against this misinterpretation of the facts of nature.
The editor of the ‘Nineteenth Century,’ Mr. James Knowles, with his
admirable perspicacity, at once seized the gist of the matter, and with
a truly youthful energy encouraged me to take it in hand. The other
was H. W. Bates, whom Darwin has truly described in his autobiography
as one of the most intelligent men whom he ever met. He was secretary
of the Geographical Society, and I knew him. When I spoke to him of my
intention he was delighted with it. ‘Yes, most assuredly write it,’ he
said. ‘That is true Darwinism. It is a shame to think of what “they”
have made of Darwin’s ideas. Write it, and when you have published
it, I will write you a letter in that sense which you may publish.’ I
could not have had better encouragement, and began the work which was
published in the ‘Nineteenth Century’ under the titles of ‘Mutual Aid
among Animals,’ ‘among Savages,’ ‘among Barbarians,’ ‘in the Mediæval
City,’ and ‘among Ourselves.’ Unfortunately I neglected to submit to
Bates the first two articles of this series, dealing with animals,
which were published during his lifetime; I hoped to be soon ready with
the second part of the work, ‘Mutual Aid among Men,’ but it took me
several years before I completed it, and in the meantime Bates was no
more among us.

The researches which I had to make during these studies in order to
acquaint myself with the institutions of the barbarian period and
with those of the mediæval free cities, led me to another important
research--the part played in history by the state, since its last
incarnation in Europe, during the last three centuries. And on the
other side, the study of the mutual-support institutions at different
stages of civilization, led me to examine the evolutionist bases of the
sense of justice and of morality in man.

Within the last ten years the growth of socialism in England has taken
a new aspect. Those who judge only by the numbers of socialist and
anarchist meetings held in the country, and the audiences attracted by
these meetings, are prone to conclude that socialist propaganda is now
on the decline. And those who judge the progress of it by the numbers
of votes that are given to those who claim to represent socialism
in Parliament, jump to the conclusion that there is now hardly any
socialist propaganda in England. But the depth and the penetration
of the socialist ideas can nowhere be judged by the numbers of votes
given in favour of those who bring more or less socialism into their
electoral programmes. Still less so in England. The fact is, that out
of the three directions of socialism which were formulated by Fourier,
Saint Simon, and Robert Owen, it is the latter which prevails in
England and Scotland. Consequently it is not so much by the numbers of
meetings or socialist votes that the intensity of the movement must be
judged, but by the infiltration of the socialist point of view into the
trade unionist, the co-operative, and the so-called municipal socialist
movements, as well as the general infiltration of socialist ideas all
over the country. Under this aspect, the extent to which the socialist
views have penetrated is vast in comparison to what it was in 1886; and
I do not hesitate to say that it is simply immense in comparison to
what it was in the years 1876-82. I may also add that the persevering
endeavours of the tiny anarchist groups have contributed, to an extent
which makes us feel that we have not wasted our time, to spread the
ideas of No-Government, of the rights of the individual, of local
action, and free agreement--as against those of State all-mightiness,
centralization, and discipline, which were dominant twenty years ago.

Europe altogether is traversing now a very bad phase of the development
of the military spirit. This was an unavoidable consequence of the
victory obtained by the German military empire, with its universal
military service system, over France in 1871, and it was already then
foreseen and foretold by many--in an especially impressive form by
Bakúnin. But the counter-current already begins to make itself felt in
modern life.

As to the way communist ideas, divested of their monastic form, have
penetrated in Europe and America, the extent of that penetration has
been immense during the twenty-seven years that I have taken an active
part in the socialist movement and could observe their growth. When
I think of the vague, confused, timid ideas which were expressed by
the workers at the first congresses of the International Workingmen’s
Association, or which were current at Paris during the Commune
insurrection, even amongst the most thoughtful of the leaders, and
compare them with those which have been arrived at to-day by an immense
number of working-men, I must say they seem to me as two entirely
different worlds.

There is no period in history--with the exception, perhaps, of the
period of the insurrections in the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries
(which led to the birth of the mediæval Communes), during which a
similarly deep change has taken place in the current conceptions of
Society. And now, in my fifty-seventh year, I am even more deeply
convinced than I was twenty-five years ago, that a chance combination
of accidental circumstances may bring about in Europe a revolution far
more important and as widely spread as that of 1848; not in the sense
of mere fighting between different parties, but in the sense of a deep
and rapid social reconstruction; and I am convinced that whatever
character such movements may take in different countries, there will
be displayed in all of them a far deeper comprehension of the required
changes than has ever been displayed within the last six centuries;
while the resistance which such movements will meet in the privileged
classes will hardly have the character of obtuse obstinacy which made
revolutions assume the violent character which they took in times past.

To obtain this immense result was well worth the efforts which so many
thousands of men and women of all nations and all classes have made
within the last thirty years.

                 THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED

Transcriber’s Notes

Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Small capitals are changed to all capitals.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.

Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been corrected
after careful comparison with other occurrences within the text and
consultation of external sources. Except for those changes noted below,
all misspellings in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage, have
been retained.

The following corrections have been applied to the text (before/after):

  (p. 10)
  ... on the battle-field, with a deep ...
  ... on the battlefield, with a deep ...

  (p. 19)
  ... in Gogol’s _Revisór_ and ...
  ... in Gógol’s _Revisór_ and ...

  (p. 21)
  ... and Madame Mazímoff thought ...
  ... and Madame Nazímoff thought ...

  (p. 59)
  ... of the habour of Sebastopol, ...
  ... of the harbour of Sebastopol, ...

  (p. 66)
  ... into his textbook; ‘and ...
  ... into his text-book; ‘and ...

  (p. 95)
  ... than many similiar estimates ...
  ... than many similar estimates ...

  (p. 139)
  ... the small trades-people and the ...
  ... the small tradespeople and the ...

  (p. 150)
  ... however, was looked, and a ...
  ... however, was locked, and a ...

  (p. 193)
  ... out the eagle ‘That pass ...
  ... out the eagle. ‘That pass ...

  (p. 202)
  ... those which Tolstoy expresses ...
  ... those which Tolstóy expresses ...

  (p. 222)
  ... which our step-mother has taken ...
  ... which our stepmother has taken ...

  (p. 233)
  ... in the heart-rending novels ...
  ... in the heartrending novels ...

  (p. 249)
  And the constrast climate! ...
  And the contrast of climate! ...

  (p. 280)
  ... Their watch-word was, ...
  ... Their watchword was, ...

  (p. 281)
  ... Moscow, and Kieff, eager ...
  ... Moscow, and Kíeff, eager ...

  (p. 315)
  ... being a newcomer, I could ...
  ... being a new-comer, I could ...

  (p. 357)
  ... ‘Is Mr. Lávroff in?’ ...
  ... ‘Is Mr. Lavróff in?’ ...

  (p. 399)
  ... same fate at Kieff; and the ...
  ... same fate at Kíeff; and the ...

  (p. 408)
  ... duty to destribute religious ...
  ... duty to distribute religious ...

  (p. 414)
  ... them had taked refuge at ...
  ... them had taken refuge at ...

  (p. 424)
  ... intellect, and preverted imagination, ...
  ... intellect, and perverted imagination, ...

  (p. 449)
  ... there ventilated there griefs ...
  ... there ventilated their griefs ...

  (p. 453)
  ... the armies of Theirs, and the ...
  ... the armies of Thiers, and the ...

