TITLE: Memoirs of a Revolutionist
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: 1906
SOURCE_ID: pg_73882
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/73882-0.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/73882
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-03T19:51:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

III. All three had entirely won the hearts of the Paris workers, and
when the Commune insurrection broke out they were elected members of
the Council of the Commune, all three receiving formidable numbers of
votes. Malon was also mayor of one of the Paris _arrondissements_.
Now, in Switzerland, he was earning his living as a basket-maker. He
had rented for a few coppers a month a small open shed out of the
town, on the slope of a hill, from which he enjoyed while at work an
extensive view of the Lake of Neuchâtel. At night he wrote letters, a
book on the Commune, short articles for the labour papers--and thus
he became a writer. Every day I went to see him and to hear what this
broad-faced, laborious, slightly poetical, quiet, and most good-hearted
Communard had to tell me about the insurrection in which he took a
prominent part, and which he had just described in a book, ‘The Third
Defeat of the French Proletariate.’

One morning when I had climbed the hill and reached his shed, he met
me quite radiant with the words: ‘You know, Pindy is alive! Here is a
letter from him; he is in Switzerland.’ Nothing had been heard of Pindy
since he was seen last on May 25 or May 26 at the Tuileries, and he
was supposed to be dead, while in reality he remained in concealment
at Paris. And while Malon’s fingers continued to ply the wickers and
to shape them into an elegant basket, he told me in his quiet voice,
which only slightly trembled at times, how many men had been shot by
the Versailles troops on the supposition that they were Pindy, Varlin,
himself, or some other leader. He told me what he knew of the death
of Varlin, the book-binder whom the Paris workers worshipped, or old
Delécluze, who did not want to survive the defeat, and many others; and
he related the horrors which he had witnessed during that carnival of
blood with which the wealthy classes of Paris celebrated their return
to the capital, and then--the spirit of retaliation which took hold
of a crowd, led by Raoul Rigault, which executed the hostages of the
Commune.

His lips quivered when he spoke of the heroism of the children; and
he quite broke down when he told me the story of that boy whom the
Versailles troops were going to shoot, and who asked the officer’s
permission to hand first a silver watch, which he had on, to his
mother, who lived close by. The officer, yielding to a moment of pity,
let the boy go, probably hoping that he would never return. But a
quarter of an hour later the boy was back and, taking his place amidst
the corpses at the wall, said: ‘I am ready.’ Twelve bullets put an end
to his young life.

I think I never suffered so much as when I read that terrible book, ‘Le
Livre Rouge de la Justice Rurale,’ which contained nothing but extracts
from the letters of the _Standard_, _Daily Telegraph_, and _Times_
correspondents, written from Paris during the last days of May 1871,
relating the horrors committed by the Versailles army under Galliffet,
together with a few quotations from the Paris _Figaro_, imbued with a
bloodthirsty spirit towards the insurgents. In reading these pages I
was filled with despair concerning mankind, and should have continued
to despair, had I not afterwards seen in those of the defeated party
who had lived through all these horrors, that absence of hatred, that
confidence in the final triumph of their ideas, that calm though sad
gaze of their eyes directed towards the future, that readiness to
forget the nightmare of the past, which struck me in Malon; in fact, in
nearly all the refugees of the Commune whom I met at Geneva, and which
I still see in Louise Michel, Lefrançais, Elisée Reclus, and other
friends.

From Neuchâtel I went to Sonvilliers. In a little valley in the Jura
hills there is a succession of small towns and villages of which
the French-speaking population was at that time entirely employed
in the various branches of watchmaking; whole families used to work
in small workshops. In one of them I found another leader, Adhémar
Schwitzguébel, with whom, also, I afterward became very closely
connected. He sat among a dozen young men who were engraving lids of
gold and silver watches. I was asked to take a seat on a bench or
table, and soon we were all engaged in a lively conversation upon
socialism, government or no government, and the coming congresses.

In the evening a heavy snowstorm raged; it blinded us, and froze
the blood in our veins, as we struggled to the next village. But,
notwithstanding the storm, about fifty watchmakers, chiefly old people,
came from the neighbouring towns and villages--some of them as far
as seven miles distant--to join in a small informal meeting that was
called for that evening.

The very organization of the watch trade, which permits men to know
one another thoroughly and to work in their own houses, where they
are free to talk, explains why the level of intellectual development
in this population is higher than that of workers who spend all their
life from early childhood in the factories. There is more independence
and more originality among petty trades’ workers. But the absence of
a division between the leaders and the masses in the Jura Federation
was also the reason why there was not a question upon which every
member of the federation would not strive to form his own independent
opinion. Here I saw that the workers were not a mass that was being led
and made subservient to the political ends of a few men; their leaders
were simply their more active comrades--initiators rather than leaders.
The clearness of insight, the soundness of judgment, the capacity for
disentangling complex social questions, which I noticed amongst these
workers, especially the middle-aged ones, deeply impressed me; and I
am firmly persuaded that if the Jura Federation has played a prominent
part in the development of socialism, it is not only on account of the
importance of the no-government and federalist ideas of which it was
the champion, but also on account of the expression which was given to
these ideas by the good sense of the Jura watchmakers. Without their
aid, these conceptions might have remained mere abstractions for a long
time.

The theoretical aspects of anarchism, as they were then beginning to be
expressed in the Jura Federation, especially by Bakúnin; the criticisms
of state socialism--the fear of an economic despotism, far more
dangerous than the merely political despotism--which I heard formulated
there; and the revolutionary character of the agitation, appealed
strongly to my mind. But the equalitarian relations which I found in
the Jura Mountains, the independence of thought and expression which
I saw developing in the workers, and their unlimited devotion to the
cause appealed even more strongly to my feelings; and when I came away
from the mountains, after a week’s stay with the watchmakers, my views
upon socialism were settled. I was an anarchist.

A subsequent journey to Belgium, where I could compare once more the
centralized political agitation at Brussels with the economic and
independent agitation that was going on amongst the clothiers at
Verviers, only strengthened my views. These clothiers were one of the
most sympathetic populations that I have ever met with in Western
Europe.

X

Bakúnin was at that time at Locarno. I did not see him, and now regret
it very much, because he was dead when I returned four years later to
Switzerland. It was he who had helped the Jura friends to clear up
their ideas and to formulate their aspirations; he who had inspired
them with his powerful, burning, irresistible revolutionary enthusiasm.
As soon as he saw that a small newspaper, which Guillaume began to edit
in the Jura hills (at Locle), was sounding a new note of independent
thought in the socialist movement, he came to Locle, talked for whole
days and whole nights long to his new friends about the historical
necessity of a new move in the anarchist direction; he wrote for that
paper a series of profound and brilliant articles on the historical
progress of mankind towards freedom; he infused enthusiasm into his new
friends, and he created that centre of propaganda from which anarchism
spread later on to other parts of Europe.

After he had moved to Locarno--from whence he started a similar
movement in Italy and, through his sympathetic and gifted emissary,
Fanelli, also in Spain--the work that he had begun in the Jura hills
was continued independently by the Jurassians themselves. The name
of ‘Michel’ often recurred in their conversations--not, however, as
that of an absent chief whose opinions would make law, but as that of
a personal friend of whom everyone spoke with love, in a spirit of
comradeship. What struck me most was that Bakúnin’s influence was felt
much less as the influence of an intellectual authority than as the
influence of a moral personality. In conversations about anarchism,
or about the attitude of the federation, I never heard it said,
‘Bakúnin has said so’ or ‘Bakúnin thinks so,’ as if it clenched the
discussion. His writings and his sayings were not a text that one had
to obey--as is often unfortunately the case in political parties. In
all such matters, in which intellect is the supreme judge, everyone in
discussion used his own arguments. Their general drift and tenor might
have been suggested by Bakúnin, or Bakúnin might have borrowed them
from his Jura friends--at any rate, in each individual the arguments
retained their own individual character. I only once heard Bakúnin’s
name invoked as an authority in itself, and that struck me so much that
I even now remember the spot where the conversation took place and its
surroundings. The young men began once in the presence of women some
young men’s talk, not very respectful towards the other sex, when one
of the women present put a sudden stop to it by exclaiming: ‘Pity that
Michel is not here: he would have put you in your place!’ The colossal
figure of the revolutionist who had given up everything for the sake of
the revolution, and lived for it alone, borrowing from his conception
of it the highest and purest conceptions of life, continued to inspire
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

I returned from this journey with distinct sociological conceptions
which I have retained since, doing my best to develop them in more and
more definite, concrete forms.

There was, however, one point which I did not accept without having
given to it a great deal of thinking and many hours of my nights. I
clearly saw that the immense change which would hand over everything
that is necessary for life and production into the hands of society--be
it the Folk State of the social democrats, or the free unions of freely
associated groups, as the anarchists say--would imply a revolution far
more profound than any of those which history has on record. Moreover,
in such a revolution the workers would have against them, not the
rotten generation of aristocrats against whom the French peasants
and republicans had to fight in the last century--and even that
fight was a desperate one--but the far more powerful, intellectually
and physically, middle classes, which have at their service all the
potent machinery of the modern State. However, I soon noticed that
no revolution, whether peaceful or violent, has ever taken place
without the new ideals having deeply penetrated into the very class
itself whose economical and political privileges had to be assailed.
I had witnessed the abolition of serfdom in Russia, and I knew that
if a conviction of the injustice of their rights had not widely
spread within the serf-owners’ class itself (as a consequence of the
previous evolution and revolutions accomplished in Western Europe),
the emancipation of the serfs would never have been accomplished as
easily as it was in 1861. And I saw that the idea of emancipation of
the workers from the present wage-system was making headway amongst
the middle classes themselves. The most ardent defenders of the present
economical conditions had already abandoned the plea of _right_ in
defending the present privileges--questions as to the _opportuneness_
of such a change having already taken its place. They did not deny
the desirability of some such change, and only asked whether the new
economical organization advocated by the socialists would really be
better than the present one; whether a society in which the workers
would have a dominant voice would be able to manage production better
than the individual capitalists, actuated by mere considerations of
self-interest, manage it at the present time.

Besides, I began gradually to understand that revolutions, _i.e._
periods of accelerated rapid evolution and rapid changes, are as much
in the nature of human society as the slow evolution which incessantly
goes on now among the civilized races of mankind. And each time that
such a period of accelerated evolution and thorough reconstruction
begins, civil war may break out on a small or on a grand scale. The
question is, then, not so much how to avoid revolutions as how to
attain the greatest results with the most limited amount of civil war,
the least number of victims, and a minimum of mutual embitterment.
For that end there is only one means; namely, that the oppressed part
of society should obtain the clearest possible conception of what
they intend to achieve and how, and that they should be imbued with
the enthusiasm which is necessary for that achievement--in which case
they will be sure to attract to their cause the best and the freshest
intellectual forces of the class which is possessed of historically
grown-up privileges.

The Commune of Paris was a terrible example of an outbreak with yet
undetermined ideals. When the workers became, in March 1871, the
masters of the great city, they did not attack the property rights
vested in the middle classes. On the contrary, they took these rights
under their protection. The leaders of the Commune covered the National
Bank with their bodies, and notwithstanding the crisis which had
paralysed industry, and the consequent absence of earning for a mass
of workers, they protected the rights of the owners of the factories,
the trade establishments, and the dwelling-houses at Paris with their
decrees. However, when the movement was crushed, no account was taken
by the middle classes of the modesty of the Communalist claims of the
insurgents. Having lived for two months in fear that the workers would
make an assault upon their property rights, the rich men of France took
upon the workers just the same revenge as if they had made the assault
in reality. Nearly thirty thousand workers were slaughtered, as is
known, not in battle but after they had lost the battle. If the workers
had taken steps towards the socialization of property, the revenge
could not have been more terrible.

If, then, my conclusion was that there are periods in human development
when a conflict is unavoidable, and civil war breaks out quite
independently of the will of particular individuals, let, at least,
these conflicts take place, not on the ground of vague aspirations, but
upon definite issues; not upon secondary points, the insignificance
of which does not diminish the violence of the conflict, but upon
broad ideas which inspire men by the grandness of the horizon which
they bring into view. In this last case the conflict itself will
depend much less upon the efficacy of firearms and guns than upon the
force of the creative genius which will be brought into action in the
work of reconstruction of society. It will depend chiefly upon the
constructive forces of society taking for the moment a free course;
upon the inspirations being of a higher standard, and so winning more
sympathy even from those who, as a class, are opposed to the change.
The conflict, being thus engaged in on larger issues, will purify the
social atmosphere itself; and the numbers of victims on both sides will
certainly be much smaller than they would have been in case the fight
had been fought upon matters of secondary importance in which the lower
instincts of men find a free play.

With these ideas I returned to Russia.

XI

During my journey I had bought a number of books and collections of
socialist newspapers. In Russia such books were ‘unconditionally
prohibited’ by censorship; and some of the collections of newspapers
and reports of international congresses could not be bought for any
amount of money even in Belgium. ‘Shall I part with them, while
my brother and my friends would be so glad to have them at St.
Petersburg?’ I asked myself; and I decided that by all means I must get
them into Russia.

I returned to St. Petersburg _viâ_ Vienna and Warsaw. Thousands of
Jews live by smuggling on the Polish frontier, and I thought that if I
could succeed in discovering only one of them my books would be carried
in safety across the border. However, to alight at a small railway
station near the frontier while every other passenger went on, and to
hunt there for smugglers, would hardly have been reasonable; so I took
a side branch of the railway and went to Cracow. ‘The capital of Old
Poland is near to the frontier,’ I thought, ‘and I shall find there
some Jew who will lead me to the men I seek.’

I reached the once renowned and brilliant city in the evening,
and early next morning went out from my hotel on my search. To my
bewilderment I saw, however, at every street corner and wherever I
turned my eyes in the otherwise deserted market place a Jew, wearing
the traditional long dress and locks of his forefathers, and watching
there for some Polish nobleman or tradesman who might send him on an
errand and pay him a few coppers for the service. I wanted to find
_one_ Jew; and now there were too many of them. Whom should I approach?
I made the round of the town, and then, in my despair, I decided
to accost the Jew who stood at the entrance gate of my hotel--an
immense old palace, of which in former days every hall was filled with
elegant crowds of gaily dressed dancers, but which now fulfilled the
more prosaic function of giving food and shelter to a few occasional
travellers. I explained to the man my desire of smuggling into Russia a
rather heavy bundle of books and newspapers.

‘Very easily done, sir,’ he replied. ‘I will just bring to you the
representative of the Universal Company for the International Exchange
of (let me say) Rags and Bones. They carry on the largest smuggling
business in the world, and he is sure to oblige you.’ Half an hour
later he really returned with the representative of the company--a most
elegant young man, who spoke in perfection Russian, German, and Polish.

He looked at my bundle, weighed it with his hands, and asked what sort
of books were in it.

‘All severely prohibited by Russian censorship; that is why they must
be smuggled in.’

‘Books,’ he said, ‘are not exactly in our line of trade; our business
lies in costly silks. If I were going to pay my men by weight,
according to our silk tariff, I should have to ask you a quite
extravagant price. And then, to tell the truth, I don’t much like
meddling with books. The slightest mishap, and “they” would make of it
a political affair, and then it would cost the Universal Rags and Bones
Company a tremendous sum of money to get clear of it.’

I probably looked very sad, for the elegant young man who represented
the Universal Rags and Bones Company immediately added: ‘Don’t be
troubled. He [the hotel commissionnaire] will arrange it for you in
some other way.’

‘Oh yes. There are scores of ways to arrange such a trifle, to oblige
the gentleman,’ jovially remarked the commissionnaire, as he left me.

In an hour’s time he came back with another young man. This one took
the bundle, put it by the side of the door, and said: ‘It’s all right.
If you leave to-morrow, you shall have your books at such a station in
Russia,’ and he explained to me how it would be managed.

‘How much will it cost?’ I asked.

‘How much are you disposed to pay?’ was the reply.

I emptied my purse on the table, and said: ‘That much for my journey.
The remainder is yours, I will travel third class!’

‘Wai! wai! wai!’ exclaimed both men at once, ‘What are you saying, sir?
Such a gentleman travel third class! Never! No, no, no, that won’t
do.... Eight roubles will do for us, and then one rouble or so for the
commissionnaire, if you are agreeable to it--just as much as you like.
We are not highway robbers, but honest tradesmen.’ And they bluntly
refused to take more money.

I had often heard of the honesty of the Jewish smugglers on the
frontier; but I had never expected to have such a proof of it. Later
on, when our circle imported many books from abroad, or still later,
when so many revolutionists and refugees crossed the frontier in
entering or leaving Russia, there was not a case in which the smugglers
betrayed anyone, or took advantage of the circumstances to exact an
exorbitant price for their services.

Next day I left Cracow; and at the designated Russian station a porter
approached my compartment, and, speaking loudly, so as to be heard by
the gendarme who was walking along the platform, said to me, ‘Here is
the bag your highness left the other day,’ and handed me my precious
parcel.

I was so pleased to have it that I did not even stop at Warsaw, but
continued my journey directly to St. Petersburg, to show my trophies to
my brother.

XII

A formidable movement was developing in the meantime amongst the
educated youth of Russia. Serfdom was abolished. But quite a network
of habits and customs of domestic slavery, of utter disregard of
human individuality, of despotism on the part of the fathers, and
of hypocritical submission on that of the wives, the sons, and the
daughters, had developed during the two hundred and fifty years that
serfdom had existed. Everywhere in Europe, at the beginning of this
century, there was a great deal of domestic despotism--the writings of
Thackeray and Dickens bear ample testimony to it--but nowhere else had
that tyranny attained such a luxurious development as in Russia. All
Russian life, in the family, in the relations between commander and
subordinate, military chief and soldier, employer and employee, bore
the stamp of it. Quite a world of customs and manners of thinking, of
prejudices and moral cowardice, of habits bred by a lazy existence, had
grown up; and even the best men of the time paid a large tribute to
these products of the serfdom period.

Law could have no grip upon these things. Only a vigorous social
movement, which would attack the very roots of the evil, could
reform the habits and customs of everyday life; and in Russia this
movement--this revolt of the individual--took a far more powerful
character, and became far more sweeping in its criticisms, than
anywhere in Western Europe or America. ‘Nihilism’ was the name that
Turguéneff gave it in his epoch-making novel, ‘Fathers and Sons.’

The movement is often misunderstood in western Europe. In the press,
for example, Nihilism is confused with terrorism. The revolutionary
disturbance which broke out in Russia toward the close of the reign
of Alexander II., and ended in the tragical death of the Tsar, is
constantly described as Nihilism. This is, however, a mistake.
To confuse Nihilism with terrorism is as wrong as to confuse a
philosophical movement like Stoicism or Positivism with a political
movement, such as, for example, republicanism. Terrorism was called
into existence by certain special conditions of the political struggle
at a given historical moment. It has lived, and has died. It may revive
and die out again. But Nihilism has impressed its stamp upon the whole
of the life of the educated classes of Russia, and that stamp will be
retained for many years to come. It is Nihilism, divested of some of
its rougher aspects--which were unavoidable in a young movement of that
sort--which gives now to the life of a great portion of the educated
classes of Russia a certain peculiar character which we Russians regret
not to find in the life of Western Europe. It is Nihilism, again, in
its various manifestations which gives to many of our writers that
remarkable sincerity, that habit of ‘thinking aloud,’ which astounds
western European readers.

First of all, the Nihilist declared war upon what may be described as
the ‘conventional lies of civilized mankind.’ Absolute sincerity was
his distinctive feature, and in the name of that sincerity he gave up,
and asked others to give up, those superstitions, prejudices, habits,
and customs which their own reason could not justify. He refused to
bend before any authority except that of reason, and in the analysis of
every social institution or habit he revolted against any sort of more
or less masked sophism.

He broke, of course, with the superstitions of his fathers, and
in his philosophical conceptions he was a positivist, an agnostic,
a Spencerian evolutionist, or a scientific materialist; and while
he never attacked the simple, sincere religious belief which is a
psychological necessity of feeling, he bitterly fought against the
hypocrisy that leads people to assume the outward mask of a religion
which they continually throw aside as useless ballast.

The life of civilized people is full of little conventional lies.
Persons who dislike each other, meeting in the street, make their faces
radiant with a happy smile; the Nihilist remained unmoved, and smiled
only for those whom he was really glad to meet. All those forms of
outward politeness which are mere hypocrisy were equally repugnant to
him, and he assumed a certain external roughness as a protest against
the smooth amiability of his fathers. He saw them wildly talking
as idealist sentimentalists, and at the same time acting as real
barbarians toward their wives, their children, and their serfs; and he
rose in revolt against that sort of sentimentalism, which, after all,
so nicely accommodated itself to the anything but ideal conditions of
Russian life. Art was involved in the same sweeping negation. Continual
talk about beauty, the ideal, art for art’s sake, æsthetics, and the
like, so willingly indulged in--while every object of art was bought
with money exacted from starving peasants or from underpaid workers,
and the so-called ‘worship of the beautiful’ was but a mask to cover
the most commonplace dissoluteness--inspired him with disgust; and the
criticisms of art which one of the greatest artists of the century,
Tolstóy, has now powerfully formulated, the Nihilist expressed in the
sweeping assertion, ‘A pair of boots is more important than all your
Madonnas and all your refined talk about Shakespeare.’

Marriage without love and familiarity without friendship were
repudiated. The Nihilist girl, compelled by her parents to be a doll in
a doll’s house, and to marry for property’s sake, preferred to abandon
her house and her silk dresses; she put on a black woollen dress of the
plainest description, cut off her hair, and went to a high school, in
order to win there her personal independence. The woman who saw that
her marriage was no longer a marriage--that neither love nor friendship
connected any more those who were legally considered husband and
wife--preferred to break a bond which retained none of its essential
features; and she often went with her children to face poverty,
preferring loneliness and misery to a life which, under conventional
conditions, would have given a perpetual lie to her best self.

The Nihilist carried his love of sincerity even into the minutest
details of everyday life. He discarded the conventional forms of
society talk, and expressed his opinions in a blunt and terse way, even
with a certain affectation of outward roughness.

We used in Irkútsk to meet once a week in a club, and to have some
dancing, I was for a time a regular visitor at these _soirées_, but
gradually, having to work, I abandoned them. One night, as I had not
made my appearance for several weeks in succession, a young friend of
mine was asked by one of the ladies why I did not come any more to
their gatherings. ‘He takes a ride now when he wants exercise,’ was the
rather rough reply of my friend. ‘But he might come to spend a couple
of hours with us, without dancing,’ one of the ladies ventured to say.
‘What would he do here?’ retorted my Nihilist friend, ‘talk with you
about fashions and furbelows? He has had enough of that nonsense.’
‘But he sees occasionally Miss So-and-So,’ timidly remarked one of
the young ladies present. ‘Yes, but she is a studious girl,’ bluntly
replied my friend, ‘he helps her with her German.’ I must add that
this undoubtedly rough rebuke had the effect that most of the Irkútsk
girls began next to besiege my brother, my friend, and myself with
questions as to what we should advise them to read or to study. With
the same frankness the Nihilist spoke to his acquaintances, telling
them that all their talk about ‘this poor people’ was sheer hypocrisy
so long as they lived upon the underpaid work of these people whom they
commiserated at their ease as they chatted together in richly decorated
rooms; and with the same frankness a Nihilist would inform a high
functionary that he (the said functionary) cared not a straw for the
welfare of those whom he ruled, but was simply a thief!

With a certain austerity the Nihilist would rebuke the woman who
indulged in small talk, and prided herself on her ‘womanly’ manners
and elaborate toilette. He would bluntly say to a pretty young person:
‘How is it that you are not ashamed to talk this nonsense and to wear
that chignon of false hair?’ In a woman he wanted to find a comrade,
a human personality--not a doll or a ‘muslin girl’--and he absolutely
refused to join in those petty tokens of politeness with which men
surround those whom they like so much to consider as ‘the weaker sex.’
When a lady entered a room a Nihilist did not jump off his seat to
offer it to her--unless he saw that she looked tired and there was no
other seat in the room. He behaved towards her as he would have behaved
towards a comrade of his own sex; but if a lady--who might have been a
total stranger to him---manifested the desire to learn something which
he knew and she knew not, he would walk every night to the far end of
a great city to help her with his lessons. The young man who would
not move his hand to serve a lady with a cup of tea, would transfer
to the girl who came to study at Moscow or St. Petersburg the only
lesson which he had got and which gave him daily bread, simply saying
to her: ‘It is easier for a man to find work than it is for a woman.
There is no attempt at knighthood in my offer, it is simply a matter of
equality.’

Two great Russian novelists, Turguéneff and Goncharóff, have tried to
represent this new type in their novels. Goncharóff, in _Precipice_,
taking a real but unrepresentative individual of this class, made a
caricature of Nihilism. Turguéneff was too good an artist, and had
himself conceived too much admiration for the new type, to let himself
be drawn into caricature painting; but even his Nihilist, Bazároff, did
not satisfy us. We found him too harsh, especially in his relations
with his old parents, and, above all, we reproached him with his
seeming neglect of his duties as a citizen. Russian youth could not
be satisfied with the merely negative attitude of Turguéneff’s hero.
Nihilism, with its affirmation of the rights of the individual and its
negation of all hypocrisy, was but a first step toward a higher type
of men and women, who are equally free, but live for a great cause. In
the Nihilists of Chernyshévsky, as they are depicted in his far less
artistic novel, ‘What is to be Done?’ they saw better portraits of
themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

‘It is bitter, the bread that has been made by slaves,’ our poet
Nekrásoff wrote. The young generation actually refused to eat that
bread, and to enjoy the riches that had been accumulated in their
fathers’ houses by means of servile labour, whether the labourers were
actual serfs or slaves of the present industrial system.

All Russia read with astonishment, in the indictment which was produced
at the court against Karakózoff and his friends, that these young men,
owners of considerable fortunes, used to live three or four in the
same room, never spending more than ten roubles (one pound) apiece a
month for all their needs, and giving at the same time their fortunes
for co-operative associations, co-operative workshops (where they
themselves worked), and the like. Five years later, thousands and
thousands of the Russian youth--the best part of it--were doing the
same. Their watchword was, ‘V naród!’ (To the people; be the people.)
During the years 1860-65 in nearly every wealthy family a bitter
struggle was going on between the fathers, who wanted to maintain the
old traditions, and the sons and daughters, who defended their right to
dispose of their life according to their own ideals. Young men left the
military service, the counter, the shop, and flocked to the university
towns. Girls, bred in the most aristocratic families, rushed penniless
to St. Petersburg, Moscow, and Kíeff, eager to learn a profession which
would free them from the domestic yoke, and some day, perhaps, also
from the possible yoke of a husband. After hard and bitter struggles,
many of them won that personal freedom. Now they wanted to utilize it,
not for their own personal enjoyment, but for carrying to the people
the knowledge that had emancipated them.

In every town of Russia, in every quarter of St. Petersburg, small
groups were formed for self-improvement and self-education; the works
of the philosophers, the writings of the economists, the researches
of the young Russian historical school, were carefully read in these
circles, and the reading was followed by endless discussions. The aim
of all that reading and discussion was to solve the great question
which rose before them: In what way could they be useful to the masses?
Gradually, they came to the idea that the only way was to settle
amongst the people and to live the people’s life. Young men went
into the villages as doctors, doctors’ assistants, teachers, village
scribes, even as agricultural labourers, blacksmiths, woodcutters, and
so on, and tried to live there in close contact with the peasants.
Girls passed teachers’ examinations, learned midwifery or nursing, and
went by the hundred into the villages, devoting themselves entirely to
the poorest part of the population.

They went without even having any ideals of social reconstruction or
any thought of revolution; merely and simply they wanted to teach the
mass of the peasants to read, to instruct them, to give them medical
help, or in any way to aid to raise them from their darkness and
misery, and to learn at the same time from them what were _their_
popular ideals of a better social life.

When I returned from Switzerland I found this movement in full swing.

XIII

I hastened, of course, to share with my friends my impressions of the
International Workingmen’s Association and my books. At the university
I had no friends, properly speaking; I was older than most of my
companions, and among young people a difference of a few years is
always an obstacle to complete comradeship. It must also be said that
since the new rules of admission to the university had been introduced
in 1861, the best of the young men, the most developed and the most
independent in thought, were sifted out of the gymnasia, and did not
gain admittance to the university. Consequently, the majority of my
comrades were good boys, laborious, but taking no interest in anything
besides the examinations.

I was friendly with only one of them: let me call him Dmítri Kelnitz.
He was born in South Russia, and, although his name was German, he
hardly spoke German, and his face was South Russian rather than
Teutonic. He was very intelligent, had read a great deal, and had
seriously thought over what he had read. He loved science and deeply
respected it, but, like many of us, he soon came to the conclusion that
to follow the career of a scientific man meant to join the camp of the
Philistines, and that there was plenty of other and more urgent work
that he could do. He attended the university lectures for two years,
and then abandoned them, giving himself entirely to social work. He
lived anyhow; I even doubt if he had a permanent lodging. Sometimes he
would come to me and ask, ‘Have you some paper?’ and, having taken
a supply of it, he would sit at the corner of a table for an hour or
two, diligently making a translation. The little that he earned in this
way was more than sufficient to satisfy all his limited wants. Then he
would hurry to a distant part of the town to see a comrade or to help
a needy friend; or he would cross St. Petersburg on foot, to a remote
suburb, in order to obtain free admission to a college for some boy in
whom the comrades were interested. He was undoubtedly a gifted man.
In Western Europe a man far less gifted would have worked his way to
a position of political or socialist leadership. No such thought ever
entered the brain of Kelnitz. To lead men was by no means his ambition,
and there was no work too insignificant for him to do. This trait,
however, was not distinctive of him alone; all those who had lived some
years in the students’ circles of those times were possessed of it to a
high degree.

Soon after my return Kelnitz invited me to join a circle which was
known among the youth as ‘the Circle of Tchaykóvsky.’ Under this name
it played an important part in the history of the social movement in
Russia, and under this name it will go down to history. ‘Its members,’
Kelnitz said to me, ‘have hitherto been mostly constitutionalists; but
they are excellent men, with minds open to any honest idea; they have
plenty of friends all over Russia, and you will see later on what you
can do.’ I already knew Tchaykóvsky and a few other members of this
circle. Tchaykóvsky had won my heart at our first meeting, and our
friendship has remained unshaken for twenty-seven years.

The beginning of this circle was a very small group of young men and
women--one of whom was Sophie Peróvskaya--who had united for purposes
of self-education and self-improvement. Tchaykóvsky was of their
number. In 1869 Necháieff had tried to start, amidst the youth imbued
with the above-mentioned desire of working amongst the people, a secret
revolutionary organization, and to secure this end he resorted to the
ways of old conspirators, without recoiling even before deceit when
he wanted to force his associates to follow his lead. Such methods
could have no success in Russia, and very soon his society broke down.
All the members were arrested, and some of the best and purest of
the Russian youth went to Siberia before they had done anything. The
circle of self-education of which I am speaking was constituted in
opposition to the methods of Necháieff. The few friends had judged,
quite correctly, that a morally developed individuality must be the
foundation of every organization, whatever political character it
may take afterward and whatever programme of action it may adopt in
the course of future events. This was why the circle of Tchaykóvsky,
gradually widening its programme, spread so extensively in Russia,
achieved such important results, and later on, when the ferocious
prosecutions of the government created a revolutionary struggle,
produced that remarkable set of men and women who fell in the terrible
contest they waged against autocracy.

At that time, however--that is, in 1872--the circle had nothing
revolutionary in it. If it had remained a mere circle of
self-improvement, it would soon have petrified like a monastery.
But the members found a suitable work. They began to spread good
books. They bought the works of Lassalle, Bervi (on the condition of
the labouring classes in Russia), Marx, Russian historical works,
and so on--whole editions--and distributed them among students in
the provinces. In a few years there was not a town of importance
in ‘thirty-eight provinces of the Russian Empire,’ to use official
language, where this circle did not have a group of comrades engaged
in the spreading of that sort of literature. Gradually, following the
general drift of the times, and stimulated by the news which came from
Western Europe about the rapid growth of the labour movement, the
circle became more and more a centre of socialistic propaganda among
the educated youth, and a natural intermediary between numbers of
provincial circles; and then, one day, the ice between students and
workers was broken, and direct relations were established with working
people at St. Petersburg and in some of the provinces. It was at that
juncture that I joined the circle, in the spring of 1872.

All secret societies are fiercely prosecuted in Russia, and the western
reader will perhaps expect from me a description of my initiation and
of the oath of allegiance which I took. I must disappoint him, because
there was nothing of the sort, and could not be; we should have been
the first to laugh at such ceremonies, and Kelnitz would not have
missed the opportunity of putting in one of his sarcastic remarks,
which would have killed any ritual. There was not even a statute. The
circle accepted as members only persons who were well known and had
been tested in various circumstances, and of whom it was felt that they
could be trusted absolutely. Before a new member was received, his
character was discussed with the frankness and seriousness which were
characteristic of the Nihilist. The slightest token of insincerity or
conceit would have barred the way to admission. The circle did not care
either to make a show of numbers, and had no tendency to concentrate
in its hands all the activity that was going on among the youth, or
to include in one organization the scores of different circles which
existed in the capitals and the provinces. With most of them friendly
relations were maintained; they were helped, and they helped us, when
necessity arose, but no assault was made on their autonomy.

The circle preferred to remain a closely united group of friends; and
never did I meet elsewhere such a collection of morally superior men
and women as the score of persons whose acquaintance I made at the
first meeting of the circle of Tchaykóvsky. I still feel proud of
having been received into that family.

XIV

When I joined the circle of Tchaykóvsky, I found its members hotly
discussing the direction to be given to their activity. Some were in
favour of continuing to carry on radical and socialistic propaganda
among the educated youth; but others thought that the sole aim of this
work should be to prepare men who would be capable of arousing the
great inert labouring masses, and that their chief activity ought to
be among the peasants and workmen in the towns. In all the circles and
groups which were formed at that time by the hundred at St. Petersburg
and in the provinces the same discussions went on, and everywhere the
second programme prevailed over the first.

If our youth had merely taken to socialism in the abstract, it might
have felt satisfied with a mere declaration of socialist principles,
including as a distant aim ‘the communistic possession of the
instruments of production,’ and in the meantime it might have carried
on some sort of political agitation. Many middle-class socialist
politicians in Western Europe and America really take this course.
But our youth had been drawn to socialism in quite another way. They
were not theorisers about socialism, but had become socialists by
living no richer than the workers live, by making no distinction
between ‘mine and thine’ in their circles, and by refusing to enjoy
for their own satisfaction the riches they had inherited from their
fathers. They had done with regard to capitalism what Tolstóy advises
should now be done with regard to war--that is, that people, instead
of criticizing war and continuing to wear the military uniform, should
refuse, each one for himself, to be a soldier and to use arms. In the
same way our Russian youth, each one for himself or herself, refused
to take personal advantage of the revenues of their fathers, Such a
youth had to go to the people--and they went. Thousands and thousands
of young men and women had already left their homes, and tried now
to live in the villages and the industrial towns in all possible
capacities. This was not an organized movement: it was one of those
mass movements which occur at certain periods of sudden awakening of
human conscience. Now that small organized groups were formed, ready to
try a systematic effort for spreading ideas of freedom and revolt in
Russia, they were forcibly brought to carry on that propaganda amidst
the dark masses of peasants and workers in the towns. Various writers
have tried to explain this movement ‘to the people’ by influences from
abroad--‘foreign agitators’ is everywhere a favourite explanation.
It is certainly true that our youth listened to the mighty voice of
Bakúnin, and that the agitation of the International Workingmen’s
Association had a fascinating effect upon us. But the movement ‘V
naród’--To the people--had a far deeper origin: it began before
‘foreign agitators’ had spoken to the Russian youth, and even before
the International Association had been founded. It began already in the
groups of Karakózoff in 1866; Turguéneff saw it coming, and already in
1859 faintly indicated it. I did my best to promote that movement in
the circle of Tchaykóvsky; but I was only working with the tide, which
was infinitely more powerful than any individual efforts.

We often spoke, of course, of the necessity of a political agitation
against our absolute government. We saw already that the mass of the
peasants were being driven to unavoidable and irremediable ruin by
foolish taxation, and by the still more foolish selling off of their
cattle to cover the arrears of taxes. We, ‘visionaries,’ saw coming
that complete ruin of a whole population which by this time, alas, has
been accomplished to an appalling extent in Central Russia, and is
confessed by the government itself. We knew how, in every direction,
Russia was being plundered in a most scandalous manner. We knew, and
we learned more every day, of the lawlessness of the functionaries,
and the almost incredible bestiality of many among them. We heard
continually of friends whose houses were raided at night by the police,
who disappeared in prisons, and who--we ascertained later on--had
been transported without judgment to hamlets in some remote province
of Russia. We felt, therefore, the necessity of a political struggle
against this terrible power, which was crushing the best intellectual
forces of the nation. But we saw no possible ground, legal or
semi-legal, for such a struggle.

Our elder brothers did not want our socialistic aspirations, and we
could not part with them. Nay, even if some of us had done so, it
would have been of no avail. The young generation, as a whole, were
treated as ‘suspects,’ and the elder generation feared to have anything
to do with them. Every young man of democratic tastes, every young
woman following a course of higher education, was a suspect in the
eyes of the state police, and was denounced by Katkóff as an enemy of
the state. Cropped hair and blue spectacles worn by a girl, a Scotch
plaid worn in winter by a student, instead of an overcoat, which were
evidences of Nihilist simplicity and democracy, were denounced as
tokens of ‘political unreliability.’ If any student’s lodging came to
be frequently visited by other students, it was periodically invaded
by the state police and searched. So common were the night raids in
certain students’ lodgings that Kelnitz once said, in his mildly
humorous way, to the police officer who was searching the rooms: ‘Why
should you go through all our books, each time you come to make a
search? You might as well have a list of them, and then come once a
month to see if they are all on the shelves; and you might, from time
to time, add the titles of the new ones.’ The slightest suspicion of
political unreliability was sufficient ground upon which to take a
young man from a high school, to imprison him for several months,
and finally to send him to some remote province of the Urals--‘for
an undetermined term,’ as they used to say in their bureaucratic
slang. Even at the time when the circle of Tchaykóvsky did nothing
but distribute books, all of which had been printed with the censor’s
approval, Tchaykóvsky was twice arrested and kept some four or six
months in prison--on the second occasion at a critical time of his
career as a chemist. His researches had recently been published in the
Bulletin of the Academy of Sciences, and he had come up for his final
university examinations. He was released at last, because the police
could not discover sufficient evidence against him to warrant his
transportation to the Urals! ‘But if we arrest you once more,’ he was
told, ‘we shall send you to Siberia.’ In fact, it was a favourite dream
of Alexander II. to have, somewhere in the steppes, a special town,
guarded night and day by patrols of Cossacks, where all suspected young
people could be sent, so as to make of them a city of ten or twenty
thousand inhabitants. Only the menace which such a city might some day
offer prevented him from carrying out this truly Asiatic scheme.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of our members, an officer, had belonged to a group of young men
whose ambition was to serve in the provincial _Zémstvos_ (district
and county councils). They regarded work in this direction as a high
mission, and prepared themselves for it by serious studies of the
economical conditions of Central Russia. Many young people cherished
for a time the same hopes; but all these hopes vanished at the first
contact with the actual government machinery.

Having granted institutions of a very limited form of self-government
to certain provinces of Russia, the government, immediately after
having passed that law, directed all its efforts to reduce that reform
to nothing and to deprive it of all its meaning and vitality. The
provincial ‘self-government’ had to content itself with the mere
function of state officials who would collect additional local taxes
and spend them for the local needs of the state. Every attempt of the
county councils to take the initiative in any improvement--schools,
teachers’ colleges, sanitary measures, agricultural improvements,
etc.--was met by the central government with suspicion--nay with
hatred--and denounced by the ‘Moscow Gazette’ as ‘separatism,’ as the
creation of ‘a state within the state,’ as rebellion against autocracy.

If anyone were to tell the true history, for example, of the teachers’
college of Tver, or of any similar undertaking of a Zémstvo in
those years, with all the petty persecutions, the prohibitions, the
suspensions, and what not with which the institution was harassed,
no West European, and especially no American reader, would believe
it. He would throw the book aside, saying, ‘It cannot be true; it
is too stupid to be true.’ And yet it was so. Whole groups of the
elected representatives of several Zémstvos were deprived of their
functions, ordered to leave their province and their estates, or were
simply exiled, for having dared to petition the emperor in the most
loyal manner concerning such rights as belonged to the Zémstvos by
law. ‘The elected members of the provincial councils must be simple
ministerial functionaries, and obey the Minister of the Interior:’
such was the theory of the St. Petersburg government. As to the less
prominent people--teachers, doctors, and the like, in the service
of the local councils--they were removed and exiled by the state
police in twenty-four hours, without further ceremony than an order
of the omnipotent Third Section of the imperial chancelry. No longer
ago than last year, a lady whose husband is a rich landowner and
occupies a prominent position in one of the Zémstvos, and who is
herself interested in education, invited eight schoolmasters to her
birthday party. ‘Poor men,’ she said to herself, ‘they never have
the opportunity of seeing anyone but the peasants.’ The day after
the party the village policeman called at the mansion and insisted
upon having the names of the eight teachers, in order to report them
to the police authorities. The lady refused to give the names. ‘Very
well,’ he replied, ‘I will find them out, nevertheless, and make my
report. Teachers _must not_ come together, and I am bound to report
if they do.’ The high position of the lady sheltered the teachers in
this case; but if they had met in the lodgings of one of their own
number they would have received a visit from the state police, and
half of them would have been dismissed by the Ministry of Education;
and if, moreover, an angry word had escaped from one of them during
the police raid, he or she would have been sent to some province of
the Urals. This is what happens to-day, thirty-three years after the
opening of the county and district councils; but it was far worse in
the seventies. What sort of basis for a political struggle could such
institutions offer?

When I inherited from my father his Tambóv estate, I thought very
seriously for a time of settling on that estate, and devoting my energy
to work in the local Zémstvo. Some peasants and the poorer priests of
the neighbourhood asked me to do so. As for myself, I should have been
content with anything I could do, no matter how small it might be, if
only it would help to raise the intellectual level and the well-being
of the peasants. But one day, when several of my advisers were
together, I asked them: ‘Supposing I were to try to start a school, an
experimental farm, a co-operative enterprise, and, at the same time,
also took upon myself the defence of that peasant from our village who
has lately been wronged--would the authorities let me do it?’ ‘Never!’
was the unanimous reply.

An old grey-haired priest, a man who was held in great esteem in our
neighbourhood, came to me a few days later, with two influential
dissenting leaders, and said: ‘Talk with these two men. If you can
manage it, go with them and, Bible in hand, preach to the peasants....
Well, you know what to preach.... No police in the world will find you,
if they conceal you.... There’s nothing to be done besides; that’s what
I, an old man, advise you.’

I told them frankly why I could not assume the part of Wiclif. But
the old man was right. A movement similar to that of the Lollards is
rapidly growing now amongst the Russian peasants. Such tortures as have
been inflicted on the peace-loving Dukhobórs, and such raids upon the
peasant dissenters in South Russia as were made in 1897, when children
were kidnapped so that they might be educated in orthodox monasteries,
will only give to that movement a force that it could not have attained
five-and-twenty years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the question of agitation for a constitution was continually being
raised in our discussions, I once proposed to our circle to take it up
seriously and to choose an appropriate plan of action. I was always
of the opinion that when the circle decided anything unanimously,
each member ought to put aside his personal feeling and give all his
strength to the task. ‘If you decide to agitate for a constitution,’ I
said, ‘this is my plan: I will separate myself from you, for appearance
sake, and maintain relations with only one member of the circle--for
instance, Tchaykóvsky--through whom I shall be kept informed how you
succeed in your work, and can communicate to you in a general way
what I am doing. My work will be among the courtiers and the higher
functionaries. I have among them many acquaintances, and know a
number of persons who are disgusted with the present conditions. I
will bring them together and unite them, if possible, into a sort of
organization; and then, some day, there is sure to be an opportunity
to direct all these forces toward compelling Alexander II. to give
Russia a constitution. There certainly will come a time when all these
people, feeling that they are compromised, will in their own interest
take a decisive step. If it is necessary, some of us, who have been
officers, might be very helpful in extending the propaganda amongst
the officers in the army; but this action must be quite separate from
yours, though parallel with it. I have seriously thought of it. I know
what connections I have and who can be trusted, and I believe some of
the discontented already look upon me as a possible centre for some
action of this sort. This course is not the one I should take of my own
choice; but if you think that it is best, I will give myself to it with
might and main.’

The circle did not accept that proposal. Knowing one another as well as
they did, my comrades probably thought that if I went in this direction
I should cease to be true to myself. For my own personal happiness, for
my own personal life, I cannot feel too grateful now that my proposal
was not accepted. I should have gone in a direction which was not the
one dictated by my own nature, and I should not have found in it the
personal happiness which I have found in other paths. But when, six
or seven years later, the terrorists were engaged in their terrible
struggle against Alexander II., I regretted that there had not been
somebody else to do the sort of work I had proposed to do in the higher
circles at St. Petersburg. With some understanding there beforehand,
and with the ramifications which such an understanding probably would
have taken all over the empire, the holocausts of victims would not
have been made in vain. At any rate, the underground work of the
executive committee ought by all means to have been supported by a
parallel agitation at the Winter Palace.

Over and over again the necessity of a political effort thus came under
discussion in our little group, with no result. The apathy and the
indifference of the wealthier classes were hopeless, and the irritation
among the persecuted youth had not yet been brought to that high pitch
which ended, six years later, in the struggle of the terrorists under
the Executive Committee. Nay--and this is one of the most tragical
ironies of history--it was the same youth whom Alexander II., in
his blind fear and fury, ordered to be sent by the hundred to hard
labour and condemned to slow death in exile; it was the same youth who
protected him in 1871-78. The very teachings of the socialist circles
were such as to prevent the repetition of a Karakózoff attempt on the
Tsar’s life. ‘Prepare in Russia a great socialist mass movement amongst
the workers and the peasants,’ was the watchword in those times. ‘Don’t
trouble about the Tsar and his counsellors. If such a movement begins,
if the peasants join in the mass movement to claim the land and to
abolish the serfdom redemption taxes, the imperial power will be the
first to seek support in the moneyed classes and the landlords and to
convoke a Parliament--just as the peasant insurrection in France in
1789 compelled the royal power to convoke the National Assembly; so it
will be in Russia.’

But there was more than that. Separate men and groups, seeing that the
reign of Alexander II. was hopelessly doomed to sink deeper and deeper
in reaction, and entertaining at the same time vague hopes as to the
supposed ‘liberalism’ of the heir-apparent--all young heirs to thrones
are supposed to be liberal--persistently reverted to the idea that the
example of Karakózoff ought to be followed. The organized circles,
however, strenuously opposed such an idea, and urged their comrades not
to resort to that course of action. I may now divulge the following
fact, which has hitherto remained unknown. When a young man came to
St. Petersburg from one of the southern provinces with the firm
intention of killing Alexander II., and some members of the Tchaykóvsky
circle learned of his plan, they not only applied all the weight of
their arguments to dissuade the young man, but, when he would not be
dissuaded, they informed him that they would keep a watch over him and
prevent him by force from making any such attempt. Knowing well how
loosely guarded the Winter Palace was at that time, I can positively
say that they saved the life of Alexander II. So firmly were the youth
opposed at that time to the war in which later, when the cup of their
sufferings was filled to overflowing, they took part.

XV

The two years that I worked with the circle of Tchaykóvsky, before I
was arrested, left a deep impression upon all my subsequent life and
thought. During those two years it was life under high pressure--that
exuberance of life when one feels at every moment the full throbbing of
all the fibres of the inner self, and when life is really worth living.
I was in a family of men and women so closely united by their common
object, and so broadly and delicately humane in their mutual relations,
that I cannot now recall a single moment of even temporary friction
marring the life of our circle. Those who have had any experience of
political agitation will appreciate the value of this statement.

Before abandoning entirely my scientific career, I considered
myself bound to finish the report of my journey to Finland for the
Geographical Society, as well as some other work that I had in hand
for the same society; and my new friends were the first to confirm me
in that decision. It would not be fair, they said, to do otherwise.
Consequently, I worked hard to finish my geological and geographical
books.

Meetings of our circle were frequent, and I never missed them. We used
to meet then in a suburban part of St. Petersburg, in a small house
of which Sophie Peróvskaya, under the assumed name and the fabricated
passport of an artisan’s wife, was the supposed tenant. She was born
of a very aristocratic family, and her father had been for some time
the military governor of St. Petersburg; but, with the approval of
her mother, who adored her, she had left her home to join a high
school, and with the three sisters Korníloff--daughters of a rich
manufacturer--she had founded that little circle of self-education
which later on became our circle. Now, in the capacity of an artisan’s
wife, in her cotton dress and men’s boots, her head covered with a
cotton kerchief, as she carried on her shoulders her two pails of
water from the Nevá, no one would have recognized in her the girl who
a few years before shone in one of the most fashionable drawing-rooms
of the capital. She was a general favourite, and every one of us,
on entering the house, had a specially friendly smile for her--even
when she, making a point of honour of keeping the house relatively
clean, quarrelled with us about the dirt which we, dressed in peasant
top-boots and sheepskins, brought in after walking the muddy streets
of the suburbs. She tried then to give to her girlish, innocent, and
very intelligent little face the most severe expression possible to it.
In her moral conceptions she was a ‘rigorist,’ but not in the least of
the sermon-preaching type. When she was dissatisfied with some one’s
conduct, she would cast a severe glance at him from beneath her brows;
but in that glance one saw her open-minded, generous nature, which
understood all that is human. On one point only she was inexorable. ‘A
women’s man,’ she once said, speaking of some one, and the expression
and the manner in which she said it, without interrupting her work, is
engraved for ever in my memory.

Peróvskaya was a ‘popularist’ to the very bottom of her heart, and
at the same time a revolutionist, a fighter of the truest steel. She
had no need to embellish the workers and the peasants with imaginary
virtues in order to love them and to work for them. She took them as
they were, and said to me once: ‘We have begun a great thing. Two
generations, perhaps, will succumb in the task, and yet it must be
done.’ None of the women of our circle would have given way before
the certainty of death on the scaffold. Each would have looked
death straight in the face. But none of them, at that stage of our
propaganda, thought of such a fate. Peróvskaya’s well-known portrait
is exceptionally good; it records so well her earnest courage, her
bright intelligence, and her loving nature. The letter she wrote to her
mother a few hours before she went to the scaffold is one of the best
expressions of a loving soul that a woman’s heart ever dictated.

The following incident will show what the other women of our circle
were. One night, Kupreyánoff and I went to Varvara B., to whom we had
to make an urgent communication. It was past midnight, but, seeing a
light in her window, we went upstairs. She sat in her tiny room at a
table copying a programme of our circle. We knew how resolute she was,
and the idea came to us to make one of those stupid jokes men sometimes
think funny. ‘B.,’ I said, ‘we come to fetch you: we are going to
try a rather mad attempt to liberate our friends from the fortress.’
She asked not one question. She quietly laid down her pen, rose from
her chair, and said only, ‘Let us go.’ She spoke in so simple, so
unaffected a voice that I felt at once how foolishly I had acted, and
told her the truth. She dropped back into her chair, with tears in her
eyes, and in a despairing voice asked: ‘It was only a joke? Why do you
make _such_ jokes?’ I fully realized then the cruelty of what I had
done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another general favourite in our circle was Serghéi Kravchínsky, who
became so well known, both in England and in the United States, under
the name of Stepniák. He was often called ‘the Baby,’ so unconcerned
was he about his own security: but his carelessness about himself was
merely the result of a complete absence of fear, which, after all, is
often the best policy for one who is hunted by the police. He soon
became well known for his propaganda in the circles of workers, under
his real Christian name of Serghéi, and consequently was very much
wanted by the police; notwithstanding that, he took no precautions
whatever to conceal himself, and I remember that one day he was
severely scolded at one of our meetings for what was described as a
gross imprudence. Being late for the meeting, as he often was, and
having a long distance to cover in order to reach our house, he,
dressed as a peasant in his sheepskin, ran the whole length of a great
main thoroughfare at full speed in the middle of the street. ‘How
could you do it?’ he was reproachfully asked. ‘You might have aroused
suspicion, and have been arrested as a common thief.’ But I wish that
everyone had been as cautious as he was in affairs where other people
could be compromised.

We made our first intimate acquaintance over Stanley’s book, ‘How
I Discovered Livingstone.’ One night our meeting had lasted till
twelve, and as we were about to leave, one of the Korníloffs entered
with a book in her hand, and asked who among us could undertake to
translate by the next morning at eight o’clock sixteen printed pages
of Stanley’s book. I looked at the size of the pages, and said that if
somebody would help me the work could be done during the night. Serghéi
volunteered, and by four o’clock the sixteen pages were done. We read
to each other our translations, one of us following the English text;
then we emptied a jar of Russian porridge which had been left on the
table for us, and went out together to return home. We became close
friends from that night.

I have always liked people capable of working, and doing their work
properly. So Serghéi’s translation and his capacity of working rapidly
had already influenced me in his favour. But when I came to know more
of him, I felt real love for his honest, frank nature, for his youthful
energy and good sense, for his superior intelligence, simplicity, and
truthfulness, and for his courage and tenacity. He had read and thought
a great deal, and upon the revolutionary character of the struggle
which we had undertaken it appeared we had similar views. He was ten
years younger than I was, and perhaps did not quite realize what a
hard contest the coming revolution would be. He told us later on, with
much humour, how he once worked among the peasants in the country.
‘One day,’ he said, ‘I was walking along the road with a comrade
when we were overtaken by a peasant in a sleigh. I began to tell the
peasant that he must not pay taxes, that the functionaries plunder the
people, and I tried to convince him by quotations from the Bible that
they must revolt. The peasant whipped up his horse, but we followed
rapidly; he made his horse trot, and we began to run behind him; all
the time I continued to talk to him about taxes and revolt. Finally he
made his horse gallop; but the animal was not worth much--an underfed
peasant pony--so my comrade and I did not fall behind, but kept up our
propaganda till we were quite out of breath.’

For some time Serghéi stayed in Kazán, and I had to correspond with
him. He always hated writing letters in cipher, so I proposed a means
of correspondence which had often been used before in conspiracies.
You write an ordinary letter about all sorts of things, but in this
letter it is only certain words--let us say, every fifth word--which
has a meaning. You write, for instance: ‘Excuse my hurried letter.
Come to-night to see me; to-morrow I shall go away to my sister. My
brother Nicholas feels worse; it was late to make an operation.’
Reading each fifth word, you find: ‘Come to-morrow to Nicholas, late.’
We had to write letters of six or seven pages to transmit one page
of information, and we had to cultivate our imagination in order to
fill the letters with all sorts of things by way of introducing the
words that were required. Serghéi, from whom it was impossible to
obtain a cipher letter, took to this kind of correspondence, and used
to send me letters containing stories with thrilling incidents and
dramatic endings. He said to me afterward that this correspondence
helped to develop his literary talent. When one has talent, everything
contributes to its development.

In January or February 1874 I was at Moscow, in one of the houses in
which I had spent my childhood. Early in the morning I was told that
a peasant desired to see me. I went out and found it was Serghéi, who
had just escaped from Tver. He was strongly built, and he, with another
ex-officer, Rogachóff, endowed with equal physical strength, went
travelling about the country as lumber sawyers. The work was very hard,
especially for inexperienced hands, but both of them liked it; and no
one would have thought to look for disguised officers in these two
strong sawyers. They wandered in this capacity for about a fortnight
without arousing suspicion, and made revolutionary propaganda right
and left without fear. Sometimes Serghéi, who knew the New Testament
almost by heart, spoke to the peasants as a religious preacher,
proving to them by quotations from the Bible that they ought to start
a revolution. Sometimes he formed his arguments of quotations from the
economists. The peasants listened to the two men as to real apostles,
took them from one house to another, and refused to be paid for food.
In a fortnight they had produced quite a stir in a number of villages.
Their fame was spreading far and wide. The peasants, young and old,
began to whisper to one another in the barns about the ‘delegates;’
they began to speak out more loudly than they usually did that the land
would soon be taken from the landlords, who would receive pensions from
the Tsar. The younger people became more aggressive toward the police
officers, saying: ‘Wait a little; our turn will come soon: you Herods
will not rule long now.’ But the fame of the sawyers reached the ears
of one of the police authorities, and they were arrested. An order was
given to take them to the next police official, ten miles away.

They were taken under the guard of several peasants, and on their
way had to pass through a village which was holding its festival.
‘Prisoners? All right! Come on here, my uncle,’ said the peasants, who
were all drinking in honour of the occasion. They were kept nearly the
whole day in that village, the peasants taking them from one house to
another, and treating them to home-made beer. The guards did not have
to be asked twice. They drank, and insisted that the prisoners should
drink too. ‘Happily,’ Serghéi said, ‘they gave us the beer in such
large wooden bowls, which were passed round, that I could put my mouth
to the rim of the bowl as if I were drinking, but no one could see how
much beer I had imbibed.’ The guards were all drunk toward night, and
preferred not to appear in this state before the police officer, so
they decided to stay in the village till morning. Serghéi kept talking
to them, and all listened to him, regretting that such a good man had
been caught. As they were going to sleep, a young peasant whispered to
Serghéi, ‘When I go to shut the gate I will leave it unbolted.’ Serghéi
and his comrade understood the hint, and as soon as all fell asleep
they went out into the street. They started at a fast pace, and at
five o’clock in the morning were twenty miles away from the village,
at a small railway station, where they took the first train, and went
to Moscow. Serghéi remained there, and later, when all of us at St.
Petersburg had been arrested, the Moscow circle, under his inspiration,
became the main centre of the agitation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here and there, small groups of propagandists had settled in towns and
villages in various capacities. Blacksmiths’ shops and small farms
had been started, and young men of the wealthier classes worked in
the shops or on the farms, to be in daily contact with the toiling
masses. At Moscow, a number of young girls, of rich families, who
had studied at the Zürich university and had started a separate
organization, went even so far as to enter cotton factories, where they
worked from fourteen to sixteen hours a day, and lived in the factory
barracks the miserable life of the Russian factory girls. It was a
grand movement, in which, at the lowest estimate, from two to three
thousand persons took an active part, while twice or thrice as many
sympathizers and supporters helped the active vanguard in various ways.
With a good half of that army our St. Petersburg circle was in regular
correspondence--always, of course, in cipher.

The literature which could be published in Russia under a rigorous
censorship--the faintest hint of socialism being prohibited--was
soon found insufficient, and we started a printing office of our own
abroad. Pamphlets for the workers and the peasants had to be written,
and our small ‘literary committee,’ of which I was a member, had its
hands full of work. Serghéi wrote a couple of such pamphlets--one
in the Lamennais style, and another containing an exposition of
socialism in a fairy tale--and both had a wide circulation. The books
and pamphlets which were printed abroad were smuggled into Russia by
thousands, stored at certain spots, and sent out to the local circles,
which distributed them amongst the peasants and the workers. All this
required a vast organization as well as much travelling about, and a
colossal correspondence, particularly for protecting our helpers and
our bookstores from the police. We had special ciphers for different
provincial circles, and often, after six or seven hours had been passed
in discussing all details, the women, who did not trust to our accuracy
in the cipher correspondence, spent all the night in covering sheets of
paper with cabalistic figures and fractions.

The utmost cordiality always prevailed at our meetings. Chairmen and
all sorts of formalism are so utterly repugnant to the Russian mind
that we had none; and although our debates were sometimes extremely
hot, especially when ‘programme questions’ were under discussion, we
always managed very well without resorting to Western formalities. An
absolute sincerity, a general desire to settle the difficulties for the
best, and a frankly expressed contempt for all that in the least degree
approached theatrical affectation were quite sufficient. If anyone of
us had ventured to attempt oratorical effects by a speech, friendly
jokes would have shown him at once that speech-making was out of
place. Often we had to take our meals during these meetings, and they
invariably consisted of rye bread, with cucumbers, a bit of cheese, and
plenty of weak tea to quench the thirst. Not that money was lacking;
there was always enough, and yet there was never too much to cover
the steadily growing expenses for printing, transportation of books,
concealing friends wanted by the police, and starting new enterprises.

At St. Petersburg it was not long before we had wide acquaintance
amongst the workers. Serdukóff, a young man of splendid education, had
made a number of friends amongst the engineers, most of them employed
in a state factory of the artillery department, and he had organized
a circle of about thirty members, who used to meet for reading and
discussion. The engineers are pretty well paid at St. Petersburg, and
those who were not married were fairly well off. They soon became quite
familiar with the current radical and socialist literature--Buckle,
Lassalle, Mill, Draper, Spielhagen, were familiar names to them; and
in their aspect these engineers differed little from students. When
Kelnitz, Serghéi, and I joined the circle, we frequently visited their
group, and gave them informal lectures upon all sorts of things.
Our hopes, however, that these young men would grow into ardent
propagandists amidst less privileged classes of workers were not fully
realised. In a free country they would have been the habitual speakers
at public meetings; but, like the privileged workers of the watch trade
in Geneva, they treated the mass of the factory hands with a sort of
contempt, and were in no haste to become martyrs to the socialist
cause. It was only after they had been arrested and kept three or four
years in prison for having dared to _think_ as socialists, and had
sounded the full depth of Russian absolutism, that several of them
developed into ardent propagandists, chiefly of a political revolution.

       *       *       *       *       *

My sympathies went especially toward the weavers and the workers in the
cotton factories. There are many thousands of them at St. Petersburg,
who work there during the winter, and return for the three summer
months to their native villages to cultivate the land. Half peasants
and half town workers, they had generally retained the social spirit of
the Russian villager. The movement spread like wildfire among them. We
had to restrain the zeal of our new friends; otherwise they would have
brought to our lodgings hundreds at a time, young and old. Most of them
lived in small associations, or _artéls_, ten or twelve persons hiring
a common apartment and taking their meals together, each one paying
every month his share of the general expenses. It was to these lodgings
that we used to go, and the weavers soon brought us in contact with
other _artéls_ of stonemasons, carpenters, and the like. In some of
these _artéls_ Serghéi, Kelnitz, and a couple more of our friends were
quite at home, and spent whole nights talking about socialism. Besides,
we had in different parts of St. Petersburg special apartments, kept
by some of our people, to which ten or twelve workers would come every
night to learn reading and writing, and after that to have a talk. From
time to time one of us went to the native villages of our town friends,
and spent a couple of weeks in almost open propaganda amongst the
peasants.

Of course, all of us who had to deal with this class of workers had
to dress like the workers themselves--that is, to wear the peasant
garb. The gap between the peasants and the educated people is so great
in Russia, and contact between them is so rare, that not only does
the appearance in a village of a man who wears the town dress awaken
general attention, but even in town, if one whose talk and dress reveal
that he is not a worker is seen to go about with workers, the suspicion
of the police is aroused at once. ‘Why should he go about with “low
people,” if he has not a bad intention?’ Often, after a dinner in a
rich mansion, or even in the Winter Palace, where I went frequently to
see a friend, I took a cab, hurried to a poor student’s lodging in a
remote suburb, exchanged my fine clothes for a cotton shirt, peasant’s
top-boots, and a sheepskin, and, joking with peasants on the way, went
to meet my worker friends in some slum. I told them what I had seen of
the labour movement abroad. They listened with an eager attention; they
lost not a word of what was said; and then came the question, ‘What
can we do in Russia?’ ‘Agitate, organize,’ was our reply; ‘there is no
royal road;’ and we read them a popular story of the French Revolution,
an adaptation of Erckmann-Chatrian’s admirable ‘Histoire d’un Paysan.’
Every one admired M. Chovel, who went as a propagandist through the
villages colporting prohibited books, and burned to follow in his
footsteps. ‘Speak to others,’ we said; ‘bring men together; and when
we become more numerous, we shall see what we can attain.’ They fully
understood, and we had only to moderate their zeal.

Amongst them I passed my happiest hours. New Year’s day of 1874, the
last I spent in Russia at liberty, is especially memorable to me. The
previous evening I had been in a choice company. Inspiring, noble words
were spoken that night about the citizen’s duties, the well-being of
the country, and the like. But underneath all the thrilling speeches,
one note resounded: How could each of the speakers preserve his own
personal well-being? Yet no one had the courage to say, frankly and
openly, that he was ready to do only that which would not endanger
his own dovecote. Sophisms--no end of sophisms--about the slowness
of evolution, the inertia of the lower classes, the uselessness of
sacrifice, were uttered to justify the unspoken words, all intermingled
with assurances of each one’s willingness to make sacrifices. I
returned home, seized suddenly with profound sadness amid all this talk.

Next morning I went to one of our weavers’ meetings. It took place in
an underground dark room. I was dressed as a peasant, and was lost
in the crowd of other sheepskins. My comrade, who was known to the
workers, simply introduced me: ‘Borodín, a friend.’ ‘Tell us, Borodín,’
he said, ‘what you have seen abroad.’ And I spoke of the labour
movement in Western Europe, its struggles, its difficulties, and its
hopes.

The audience consisted mostly of middle-aged people. They were
intensely interested. They asked me questions, all to the point,
about the minute details of the working-men’s unions, the aims of the
International Association and its chances of success, and then came
questions about what could be done in Russia, and the prospects of our
propaganda. I never minimized the dangers of our agitation, and frankly
said what I thought. ‘_We_ shall probably be sent to Siberia, one of
these days; and you--part of you--will be kept long months in prison
for having listened to us.’ This gloomy prospect did not frighten them.
‘After all, there are men in Siberia, too--not bears only.’ ‘Where men
are living others can live.’ ‘The devil is not so terrible as they
paint him.’ ‘If you are afraid of wolves, never go into the wood,’ they
said as we parted. And when, afterward, several of them were arrested,
they nearly all behaved bravely, sheltering us and betraying no one.

XVI

During the two years of which I am now speaking many arrests were made,
both at St. Petersburg and in the provinces. Not a month passed without
our losing someone, or learning that members of this or that provincial
group had disappeared. Toward the end of 1873 the arrests became more
and more frequent. In November one of our main settlements in a suburb
of St. Petersburg was raided by the police. We lost Peróvskaya and
three other friends, and all our relations with the workers in this
suburb had to be suspended. We founded a new settlement, further away
from the town, but it had soon to be abandoned. The police became very
vigilant, and the appearance of a student in the workmen’s quarters was
noticed at once; spies circulated among the workers, who were watched
closely. Dmítri Kelnitz, Serghéi, and myself, in our sheepskins and
with our pleasant looks, passed unnoticed, and continued to visit the
haunted ground. But Dmítri and Serghéi, whose names had acquired a wide
notoriety in the workmen’s quarters, were eagerly wanted by the police;
and if they had been found accidentally during a nocturnal raid at a
friend’s lodgings they would have been arrested at once. There were
periods when Dmítri had every day to hunt for a place where he could
spend the night in relative safety. ‘Can I stay the night with you?’ he
would ask, entering some comrade’s room at ten o’clock. ‘Impossible!
my lodgings have been closely watched lately. Better go to N----.’ ‘I
have just come from him, and he says spies swarm in his neighbourhood.’
‘Then, go to M----; he is a great friend of mine, and above suspicion.
But it is far from here, and you must take a cab. Here is money.’ But,
on principle, Dmítri would not take a cab, and would walk to the other
end of the town to find a refuge, or at last go to a friend whose rooms
might be searched at any given moment.

Early in January 1874, another settlement, our main stronghold
for propaganda amongst the weavers, was lost. Some of our best
propagandists disappeared behind the gates of the mysterious Third
Section. Our circle became narrower, general meetings were increasingly
difficult, and we made strenuous efforts to form new circles of young
men who might continue our work when we should all be arrested.
Tchaykóvsky was in the south, and we forced Dmítri and Serghéi to leave
St. Petersburg--actually forced them, imperiously ordering them to
leave. Only five or six of us remained to transact all the business of
our circle. I intended, as soon as I should have delivered my report to
the Geographical Society, to go to the south-west of Russia, and there
to start a sort of land league, similar to the league which became so
powerful in Ireland at the end of the seventies.

After two months of relative quiet, we learned in the middle of March
that nearly all the circle of the engineers had been arrested, and
with them a young man named Nízovkin, an ex-student, who unfortunately
had their confidence, and, we were sure, would soon try to clear
himself by telling all he knew about us. Besides Dmítri and Serghéi he
knew Serdukóff, the founder of the circle, and myself, and he would
certainly name us as soon as he was pressed with questions. A few days
later, two weavers--most unreliable fellows, who had even embezzled
some money from their comrades, and who knew me under the name of
Borodín--were arrested. These two would surely set the police at once
upon the track of Borodín, the man, dressed as a peasant, who spoke
at the weavers’ meetings. Within a week’s time all the members of our
circle, excepting Serdukóff and myself, were arrested.

There was nothing left to us but to fly from St. Petersburg: this was
exactly what we did not want to do. All our immense organization for
printing pamphlets abroad and for smuggling them into Russia; all the
network of circles, farms, and country settlements with which we were
in correspondence in nearly forty (out of fifty) provinces of European
Russia and which had been slowly built up during the last two years;
finally, our workers’ groups at St. Petersburg and our four different
centres for propaganda amongst workers of the capital--how could we
abandon all these without having found men to maintain our relations
and correspondence? Serdukóff and I decided to admit to our circle two
new members, and to transfer the business to them. We met every evening
in different parts of the town, and as we never kept any addresses or
names in writing--the smuggling addresses alone had been deposited in
a secure place, in cipher--we had to teach our new members hundreds of
names and addresses and a dozen ciphers, repeating them over and over,
until our friends had learned them by heart. Every evening we went over
the whole map of Russia in this way, dwelling especially on its western
frontier, which was studded with men and women engaged in receiving
books from the smugglers, and the eastern provinces, where we had our
main settlements. Then, always in disguise, we had to take the new
members to our sympathizers in the town, and introduce them to those
who had not yet been arrested.

The thing to be done in such a case was to disappear from one’s
apartments, and to re-appear somewhere else under an assumed name.
Serdukóff had abandoned his lodging, but, having no passport, he
concealed himself in the houses of friends. I ought to have done the
same, but a strange circumstance prevented me. I had just finished my
report upon the glacial formations in Finland and Russia, and this
report had to be read at a meeting of the Geographical Society. The
invitations were already issued, but it happened that on the appointed
day the two geological societies of St. Petersburg had a joint meeting,
and they asked the Geographical Society to postpone the reading of my
report for a week. It was known that I was going to present certain
ideas about the extension of the ice cap as far as Middle Russia, and
our geologists, with the exception of my friend and teacher, Friedrich
Schmidt, considered this speculation of far too reaching a character,
and wanted to have it thoroughly discussed. For one week more,
consequently, I could not go away.

Strangers prowled about my house and called upon me under all sorts of
fantastical pretexts: one of them wanted to buy a forest on my Tambóv
estate, which was situated in absolutely treeless prairies. I noticed
in my street--the fashionable Morskáya--one of the two arrested weavers
whom I have mentioned, and thus learned that my house was watched. Yet
I had to act as if nothing extraordinary had happened, because I was to
appear at the meeting of the Geographical Society the following Friday
night.

The meeting came. The discussions were very animated, and one point,
at least, was won. It was recognized that all old theories concerning
the diluvial period in Russia were totally baseless, and that a new
departure must be made in the investigation of the whole question. I
had the satisfaction of hearing our leading geologist, Barbot-de-Marny,
say, ‘Ice cap or not, we must acknowledge, gentlemen, that all we
have hitherto said about the action of floating ice had no foundation
whatever in actual exploration.’ And I was proposed at that meeting to
be nominated president of the Physical Geography section, while I was
asking myself whether I should not spend that very night in the prison
of the Third Section.

It would have been best not to return at all to my apartment, but I
was broken down with fatigue after the exertions of the last few days,
and went home. There was no police raid during that night. I looked
through the heaps of my papers, destroyed everything that might be
compromising for anyone, packed all my things, and prepared to leave. I
knew that my apartment was watched, but I hoped that the police would
not pay me a visit before late in the night, and that at dusk I could
slip out of the house without being noticed. Dusk came, and, as I was
starting, one of the servant girls said to me, ‘You had better go by
the service staircase.’ I understood what she meant, and went quickly
down the staircase and out of the house. One cab only stood at the
gate; I jumped into it. The driver took me to the great Perspective of
Névsky. There was no pursuit at first, and I thought myself safe; but
presently I noticed another cab running full speed after us; our horse
was delayed somehow, and the other cab passed ours.

To my astonishment, I saw in it one of the two arrested weavers,
accompanied by someone else. He waved his hand as if he had something
to tell me. I told my cabman to stop. ‘Perhaps,’ I thought, ‘he has
been released from arrest, and has an important communication to make
to me.’ But as soon as we stopped, the man who was with the weaver--he
was a detective--shouted loudly, ‘Mr. Borodín, Prince Kropótkin, I
arrest you!’ He made a signal to the policeman, of whom there are
hosts along the main thoroughfare of St. Petersburg, and at the same
time jumped into my cab and showed me a paper which bore the stamp
of the St. Petersburg police. ‘I have an order to take you before
the Governor-General for an explanation,’ he said. Resistance was
impossible--a couple of policemen were already close by--and I told my
cabman to turn round and drive to the Governor-General’s house. The
weaver remained in his cab and followed us.

It was now evident that the police had hesitated for ten days to arrest
me, because they were not sure that Borodín and I were the same person.
My response to the weaver’s call had settled their doubts.

It so happened that just as I was leaving my house a young man came
from Moscow, bringing me a letter from a friend, Voinarálsky, and
another from Dmítri, addressed to our friend Polakóff. The former
announced the establishment of a secret printing office at Moscow,
and was full of cheerful news concerning the activity in that city. I
read it and destroyed it. As the second letter contained nothing but
innocent friendly chat, I took it with me. Now that I was arrested I
thought it would be better to destroy it, and, asking the detective
to show me his paper again, I took advantage of the time that he was
fumbling in his pocket to drop the letter on the pavement without his
noticing it. However, as we reached the Governor-General’s house the
weaver handed it to the detective, saying, ‘I saw the gentleman drop
this letter on the pavement, so I picked it up.’

Now came tedious hours of waiting for the representative of the
judicial authorities, the procureur or public prosecutor. This
functionary plays the part of a straw man, who is paraded by the State
police during their searches: he gives an aspect of legality to their
proceedings. It was many hours before that gentleman was found and
brought to perform his functions as a sham representative of justice. I
was taken back to my house, and a most thorough search of all my papers
was made: this lasted till three in the morning, but did not reveal a
scrap of paper that could tell against me or anyone else.

From my house I was taken to the Third Section, that omnipotent
institution which has ruled in Russia from the beginning of the reign
of Nicholas I. down to the present time--a true ‘state in the state.’
It began under Peter I. in the Secret Department, where the adversaries
of the founder of the Russian military empire were subjected to the
most abominable tortures, under which they expired; it was continued
in the Secret Chancelry during the reigns of the Empresses, when the
Torture Chamber of the powerful Minich inspired all Russia with terror;
and it received its present organization from the iron despot, Nicholas
I., who attached to it the corps of gendarmes--the chief of the
gendarmes becoming a person far more dreaded in the Russian Empire than
the Emperor himself.

In every province of Russia, in every populous town, nay, at every
railway station, there are gendarmes who report directly to their own
generals or colonels, who in turn correspond with the chief of the
gendarmes; and the latter, seeing the Emperor every day, reports to him
what he finds necessary to report. All functionaries of the empire are
under gendarme supervision; it is the duty of the generals and colonels
to keep an eye upon the public and private life of every subject of
the Tsar--even upon the governors of the provinces, the ministers, and
the grand dukes. The Emperor himself is under their close watch, and
as they are well informed of the petty chronicle of the palace, and
know every step that the Emperor takes outside his palace, the chief of
the gendarmes becomes, so to speak, a confidant of the most intimate
affairs of the rulers of Russia.

At this period of the reign of Alexander II. the Third Section was
absolutely all-powerful. The gendarme colonels made searches by the
thousand without troubling themselves in the least about the existence
of laws and law courts in Russia. They arrested whom they liked, kept
people imprisoned as long as they pleased, and transported hundreds
to North-east Russia or Siberia according to the fancy of general or
colonel; the signature of the Minister of the Interior was a mere
formality, because he had no control over them and no knowledge of
their doings.

It was four o’clock in the morning when my examination began. ‘You
are accused,’ I was solemnly told, ‘of having belonged to a secret
society which has for its object the overthrow of the existing form of
government, and of conspiracy against the sacred person of his Imperial
Majesty. Are you guilty of this crime?’

‘Till I am brought before a court where I can speak publicly, I will
give you no replies whatever.’

‘Write,’ the procureur dictated to a scribe: ‘“Does not acknowledge
himself guilty.” Still’ he continued, after a pause, ‘I must ask
you certain questions. Do you know a person of the name of Nikolái
Tchaykóvsky?’

‘If you persist in your questions, then write “No” to any question
whatsoever that you are pleased to ask me.’

‘But if we ask you whether you know, for instance, Mr. Polakóff, whom
you spoke about a while ago?’

‘The moment _you_ ask me such a question, don’t hesitate: write “No.”
And if you ask me whether I know my brother, or my sister, or my
stepmother, write “No.” You will not receive from me another reply:
because if I answered “Yes” with regard to any person, you would at
once plan some evil against him, making a raid or something worse, and
saying next that I named him.’

A long list of questions was read, to which I patiently replied each
time, ‘Write “No.”’ That lasted for an hour, during which I learned
that all who had been arrested, with the exception of the two weavers,
had behaved very well. The weavers knew only that I had twice met a
dozen workers, and the gendarmes knew nothing about our circle.

‘What are you doing, prince?’ a gendarme officer said, as he took me
to my cell. ‘Your refusal to answer questions will be made a terrible
weapon against you.’

‘It is my right, is it not?’

‘Yes, but--you know.... I hope you will find this room comfortable. It
has been kept warm since your arrest.’

I found it quite comfortable, and fell sound asleep. I was waked the
next morning by a gendarme, who brought me the morning tea. He was soon
followed by somebody else, who whispered to me in the most unconcerned
way, ‘Here’s a scrap of paper and a pencil: write your letter.’ It
was a sympathizer, whom I knew by name; he used to transmit our
correspondence with the prisoners of the Third Section.

From all sides I heard knocks on the walls, following in rapid
succession. It was the prisoners communicating with one another by
means of light taps; but, being a new-comer, I could make nothing out
of the noise, which seemed to come from all parts of the building at
once.

       *       *       *       *       *

One thing worried me. During the search in my house, I overheard the
procureur whispering to the gendarme officer about going to make a
search at the apartment of my friend Polakóff, to whom the letter of
Dmítri was addressed. Polakóff was a young student, a very gifted
zoologist and botanist, with whom I had made my Vitím expedition in
Siberia. He was born of a poor Cossack family on the frontier of
Mongolia, and, after having surmounted all sorts of difficulties, he
had come to St. Petersburg, entered the university, where he had won
the reputation of a most promising zoologist, and was then passing his
final examinations. We had been great friends since our long journey,
and had even lived together for a time at St. Petersburg, but he took
no interest in my political activity.

I spoke of him to the procureur. ‘I give you my word of honour,’ I
said, ‘that Polakóff has never taken part in any political affair.
To-morrow he has to pass an examination, and you will spoil forever the
scientific career of a young man who has gone through great hardships,
and has struggled for years against all sorts of obstacles, to attain
his present position. I know that you do not much care for it, but
he is looked upon at the university as one of the future glories of
Russian science.’

The search was made, nevertheless, but a respite of three days was
given for the examinations. A little later I was called before the
procureur, who triumphantly showed me an envelope addressed in my
handwriting, and in it a note, also in my handwriting, which said,
‘Please take this packet to V. E., and ask that it be kept until demand
in due form is made.’ The person to whom the note was addressed was not
mentioned in the note. ‘This letter,’ the procureur said, ‘was found at
Mr. Polakóff’s; and now, prince, his fate is in your hands. If you tell
me who V. E. is, Mr. Polakóff will be released; but if you refuse to do
so, he will be kept as long as he does not make up his mind to give us
the name of that person.’

Looking at the envelope, which was addressed in black chalk, and
the letter, which was written in common lead pencil, I immediately
remembered the circumstances under which the two had been written. ‘I
am positive,’ I exclaimed at once, ‘that the note and the envelope
were not found together! It is _you_ who have put the letter in the
envelope.’

The procureur blushed. ‘Would you have me believe,’ I continued, ‘that
you, a practical man, did not notice that the two are written in quite
different pencils? And now you are trying to make people think that the
two belong to each other! Well, sir, then I tell you that the letter
was not to Polakóff.’

He hesitated for some time, but then, regaining his audacity, he said,
‘Polakóff has admitted that this letter of yours was written to him.’

Now I knew he was lying. Polakóff would have admitted everything
concerning himself; but he would have preferred to be marched to
Siberia rather than to involve another person. So, looking straight in
the face of the procureur, I replied, ‘No, sir, he has _never_ said
that, and you know perfectly well that your words are not true.’

He became furious, or pretended to be so. ‘Well, then,’ he said, ‘if
you wait here a moment, I will bring you Polakóff’s written statement
to that effect. He is in the next room under examination.’

‘Ready to wait as long as you like.’

I sat on a sofa, smoking countless cigarettes. The statement did not
come, and never came.

Of course there was no such statement. I met Polakóff in 1878 at
Geneva, whence we made a delightful excursion to the Aletsch glacier.
I need not say that his answers were what I expected them to be: he
denied having any knowledge of the letter, or of the person the letters
V. E. represented. Scores of books used to be taken from me to him,
and back to me, and the letter was found in a book, while the envelope
was discovered in the pocket of an old coat. He was kept several weeks
under arrest, and then released, owing to the intervention of his
scientific friends. V. E. was not molested, and delivered my papers in
due time.

Later on, each time I saw the procureur, I teased him with the
question: ‘And what about Polakóff’s statement?’

I was not taken back to my cell, but an hour later the procureur came
in, accompanied by a gendarme officer. ‘Our examination,’ he announced
to me, ‘is now terminated; you will be removed to another place.’

A four-wheeled cab stood at the gate. I was asked to enter it, and a
stout gendarme officer, of Caucasian origin, sat by my side. I spoke
to him, but he only snored. The cab crossed the Chain Bridge, then
passed the parade grounds and ran along the canals, as if avoiding the
more frequented thoroughfares. ‘Are we going to the Litóvsky prison?’
I asked the officer, as I knew that many of my comrades were already
there. He made no reply. The system of absolute silence which was
maintained toward me for the next two years began in this four-wheeled
cab; but when we went rolling over the Palace Bridge I understood that
I was taken to the fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul.

I admired the beautiful river, knowing that I should not soon see it
again. The sun was going down. Thick grey clouds were hanging in the
west above the Gulf of Finland, while light clouds floated over my
head, showing here and there patches of blue sky. Then the carriage
turned to the left and entered a dark arched passage, the gate of the
fortress.

‘Now I shall have to remain here for a couple of years,’ I remarked to
the officer.

‘No, why so long?’ replied the Circassian who, now that we were within
the fortress, had regained the power of speech. ‘Your affair is almost
terminated, and may be brought into court in a fortnight.’

‘My affair,’ I replied, ‘is very simple; but before bringing me to a
court you will try to arrest all the socialists in Russia, and they are
many, very many; in two years you will not have done.’ I did not then
realize how prophetic my remark was.

The carriage stopped at the door of the military commander of the
fortress, and we entered his reception hall. General Korsákoff, a thin
old man, came in, with a peevish expression on his face. The officer
spoke to him in a subdued voice, and the old man answered, ‘All right,’
looking at him with a sort of scorn, and then turned his eyes toward
me. It was evident that he was not at all pleased to receive a new
inmate, and that he felt slightly ashamed of his rôle; but he seemed
to add, ‘I am a soldier, and only do my duty.’ Presently we got into
the carriage again, but soon stopped before another gate, where we were
kept a long time until a detachment of soldiers opened it from the
inside. Proceeding on foot through narrow passages, we came to a third
iron gate, opening into a dark arched passage, from which we entered a
small room where darkness and dampness prevailed.

Several non-commissioned officers of the fortress troops moved
noiselessly about in their soft felt boots, without speaking a word,
while the governor signed the Circassian’s book acknowledging the
reception of a new prisoner. I was required to take off all my clothes,
and to put on the prison dress--a green flannel dressing-gown, immense
woollen stockings of an incredible thickness, and boat-shaped yellow
slippers, so big that I could hardly keep them on my feet when I tried
to walk. I always hated dressing-gowns and slippers, and the thick
stockings inspired me with disgust. I had to take off even a silk
undergarment, which in the damp fortress it would have been especially
desirable to retain, but that could not be allowed. I naturally began
to protest and to make a noise about this, and after an hour or so it
was restored to me by order of General Korsákoff.

Then I was taken through a dark passage, where I saw armed sentries
walking about, and was put into a cell. A heavy oak door was shut
behind me, a key turned in the lock, and I was alone in a half-dark
room.

PART FIFTH

THE FORTRESS--THE ESCAPE

I

This was, then, the terrible fortress where so much of the true
strength of Russia had perished during the last two centuries, and the
very name of which is uttered in St. Petersburg in a hushed voice.

Here Peter I. tortured his son Alexis and killed him with his own hand;
here the Princess Tarakánova was kept in a cell which filled with water
during an inundation--the rats climbing upon her to save themselves
from drowning; here the terrible Minich tortured his enemies, and
Catherine II. buried alive those who objected to her having murdered
her husband. And from the times of Peter I., for a hundred and seventy
years, the annals of this mass of stone which rises from the Nevá in
front of the Winter Palace were annals of murder and torture, of men
buried alive, condemned to a slow death, or driven to insanity in the
loneliness of the dark and damp dungeons.

Here the Decembrists, who were the first to unfurl in Russia the banner
of republican rule and the abolition of serfdom, underwent their
first experiences of martyrdom, and traces of them may still be found
in the Russian Bastille. Here were imprisoned the poets Ryléeff and
Shevchénko, Dostoévsky, Bakúnin, Chernyshévsky, Písareff, and so many
others of our best contemporary writers. Here Karakózoff was tortured
and hanged.

Here, somewhere in the Alexis ravelin, was still kept Necháieff, who
was given up to Russia by Switzerland as a common-law criminal, but was
treated as a dangerous political prisoner, and would never again see
the light. In the same ravelin were also two or three men whom, rumour
said, Alexander II., because of what they knew, and what others must
not know, about some palace mystery, ordered to be imprisoned for life.
One of them, adorned with a long grey beard, was lately seen by an
acquaintance of mine in the mysterious fortress.

All these shadows rose before my imagination. But my thoughts fixed
especially on Bakúnin, who, though he had been shut up in an Austrian
fortress, after 1848, for two years chained to the wall, and then
was handed over to Nicholas I. who kept him in this fortress for six
years longer, came out, when the Iron Tsar’s death released him after
an eight years’ imprisonment, fresher and fuller of vigour than his
comrades who had remained at liberty. ‘He has lived it through,’ I said
to myself, ‘and I must, too; I will _not_ succumb here!’

My first movement was to approach the window, which was placed so
high that I could hardly reach it with my lifted hand. It was a long,
low opening, cut in a wall five feet thick, and protected by an iron
grating and a double iron window-frame. At a distance of a dozen yards
from this window I saw the outer wall of the fortress, of immense
thickness, on the top of which I could make out a grey sentry-box. Only
by looking upward could I perceive a bit of the sky.

I made a minute inspection of the room where I had now to spend no one
could say how many years. From the position of the high chimney of the
Mint I guessed that I was in the south-western corner of the fortress,
in a bastion overlooking the Nevá. The building in which I was
incarcerated, however, was not the bastion itself, but what is called
in a fortification a _reduit_; that is, an inner two-storied pentagonal
piece of masonry which rises a little higher than the walls of the
bastion, and is meant to contain two tiers of guns. This room of mine
was a casemate destined for a big gun, and the window was an embrasure.
The rays of the sun could never penetrate it; even in summer they are
lost in the thickness of the wall. The room held an iron bed, a small
oak table, and an oak stool. The floor was covered with painted felt,
and the walls with yellow paper. However, in order to deaden sounds,
the paper was not put on the wall itself; it was pasted upon canvas,
and behind the canvas I discovered a wire grating, back of which was a
layer of felt; only beyond the felt could I reach the stone wall. At
the inner side of the room there was a washstand, and a thick oak door
in which I made out a locked opening, for passing food through, and
a little slit protected by glass and by a shutter from the outside:
this was the ‘Judas,’ through which the prisoner could be spied upon
at every moment. The sentry who stood in the passage frequently lifted
the shutter and looked inside--his boots squeaking as he crept toward
the door. I tried to speak to him; then the eye which I could see
through the slit assumed an expression of terror, and the shutter was
immediately let down, only to be furtively opened a minute or two
later; but I could not get a word of response from the sentry.

Absolute silence reigned all round. I dragged my stool to the window
and looked upon the little bit of sky that I could see; I tried to
catch some sound from the Nevá, or from the town on the opposite side
of the river; but I could not. This dead silence began to oppress me,
and I tried to sing, slowly at first, and louder and louder afterwards.

‘Have I then to say farewell to love for ever’--I caught myself singing
from my favourite opera of Glinka, ‘Ruslán and Ludmíla.’

‘Sir, do not sing, please,’ a bass voice resounded through the
food-window in my door.

‘I _will_ sing, and I shall.’

‘You may not.’

‘I will sing nevertheless.’

Then came the governor, who tried to persuade me that I must not sing,
as it would have to be reported to the commander of the fortress, and
so on.

‘But my throat will become blocked and my lungs become useless if I do
not speak and cannot sing,’ I tried to argue.

‘You had better try to sing in a lower tone, more or less to yourself,’
said the old governor in a supplicatory manner.

But all this was useless. A few days later I had lost all desire to
sing. I tried to do it on principle, but it was of no avail.

‘The main thing,’ I said to myself, ‘is to preserve my physical vigour.
I _will_ not fall ill. Let me imagine myself compelled to spend a
couple of years in a hut in the far north, during an arctic expedition.
I will take plenty of exercise, practise gymnastics, and not let
myself be broken down by my surroundings. Ten steps from one corner
to the other is already something. If I repeat them one hundred and
fifty times, I shall have walked one verst’ (two-thirds of a mile). I
determined to walk every day seven versts--about five miles: two versts
in the morning, two before dinner, two after dinner, and one before
going to sleep. ‘If I put on the table ten cigarettes, and move one of
them each time that I pass the table, I shall easily count the three
hundred times that I must walk up and down. I must walk rapidly, but
turn slowly in the corner to avoid becoming giddy, and turn each time
a different way. Then twice a day I shall practise gymnastics with my
heavy stool.’ I lifted it by one leg, holding it at arm’s length. I
turned it like a wheel, and soon learned to throw it from one hand to
the other, over my head, behind my back, and across my legs.

A few hours after I had been brought into the prison the governor came
to offer me some books, and among them was an old acquaintance and
friend of mine, the first volume of George Lewes’s ‘Physiology,’ in a
Russian translation; but the second volume, which I especially wanted
to read again, was missing. I asked, of course, to have paper, pen,
and ink, but was absolutely refused. Pen and ink are never allowed in
the fortress, unless special permission is obtained from the Emperor
himself. I suffered very much from this forced inactivity, and began
to compose in my imagination a series of novels for popular reading,
taken from Russian history--something like Eugène Sue’s ‘Mystères du
Peuple.’ I made up the plot, the descriptions, the dialogues, and tried
to commit the whole to memory from the beginning to the end. One can
easily imagine how exhausting such a work would have been if I had had
to continue it for more than two or three months.

But my brother Alexander obtained pen and ink for me. One day I was
asked to enter a four-wheeled cab, in company with the same speechless
Georgian gendarme officer of whom I have spoken before. I was taken to
the Third Section, where I was allowed an interview with my brother, in
the presence of two gendarme officers.

Alexander was at Zürich when I was arrested. From early youth he had
longed to go abroad, where men think as they like, read what they
like, and openly express their thoughts. Russian life was hateful to
him. Veracity--absolute veracity--and the most open-hearted frankness
were the dominating features of his character; he could not bear
deceit or even conceit in any form. The absence of free speech in
Russia, the Russian readiness to submit to oppression, the veiled
words to which our writers resort, were utterly repulsive to his
frank and open nature. Soon after my return from Western Europe he
removed to Switzerland, and decided to settle there. After he had lost
his two children--one from cholera in a few hours, and another from
consumption--St. Petersburg became doubly repugnant to him.

My brother did not take part in our work of agitation. He did not
believe in the possibility of a popular uprising, and he conceived
a revolution only as the action of a representative body, like the
National Assembly of France in 1789. As for the socialist agitation, he
understood it when it is conducted by means of public meetings--not as
the secret, minute work of personal propaganda which we were carrying
on. In England he would have sided with John Bright or with the
Chartists. If he had been in Paris during the uprising of June 1848, he
would surely have fought with the last handful of workers behind the
last barricade; but in the preparatory period he would have followed
Louis Blanc or Ledru Rollin.

In Switzerland he settled at Zürich, and his sympathies went with the
moderate wing of the International. Socialist on principle, he carried
out his principles in his most frugal and laborious mode of living,
toiling on passionately at his great scientific work--the main purpose
of his life--a work which was to be a nineteenth-century counter-part
to the famous _Tableau de la Nature_ of the Encyclopædists. He
soon became a close personal friend of the old refugee, Colonel P.
L. Lavróff, with whom he had very much in common in his Kantian
philosophical views.

When he learned about my arrest, Alexander immediately left
everything--the work of his life, the life itself of freedom which was
as necessary for him as free air is necessary for a bird--and returned
to St. Petersburg, which he disliked, only to help me through my
imprisonment.

We were both very much affected at this interview. My brother was
extremely excited. He hated the very sight of the blue uniforms of the
gendarmes--those executioners of all independent thought in Russia--and
expressed his feeling frankly in their presence. As for me, the sight
of him at St. Petersburg filled me with the most dismal apprehensions.
I was happy to see his honest face, his eyes full of love, and to hear
that I should see them once a month; and yet I wished him hundreds of
miles away from that place to which he came free that day, but to which
he would inevitably be brought some night under an escort of gendarmes.
‘Why did you come into the lion’s den? Go back at once!’ my whole inner
self cried; and yet I knew that he would remain as long as I was in
prison.

He understood better than any one else that inactivity would kill me,
and had already made application to obtain for me the permission of
resuming work. The Geographical Society wanted me to finish my book on
the glacial period, and my brother turned the whole scientific world
in St. Petersburg upside down to move it to support his application.
The Academy of Sciences was interested in the matter; and finally, two
or three months after my imprisonment, the governor entered my cell
and announced to me that I was permitted by the Emperor to complete
my report to the Geographical Society, and that I should be allowed
pen and ink for that purpose. ‘Till sunset only,’ he added. Sunset, at
St. Petersburg, is at three in the afternoon, in winter time; but that
could not be helped. ‘Till sunset’ were the words used by Alexander II.
when he granted the permission.

II

So I could work!

I could hardly express now the immensity of relief I then felt at being
enabled to resume writing. I would have consented to live on nothing
but bread and water, in the dampest of cellars, if only permitted to
work.

I was, however, the sole prisoner to whom writing materials were
allowed. Several of my comrades spent three years and more in
confinement before the famous trial of ‘the hundred and ninety-three’
took place, and all they had was a slate. Of course, even the
slate was welcome in that dreary loneliness, and they used it to
write exercises in the languages they were learning, or to work out
mathematical problems; but what was jotted down on the slate could last
only a few hours.

My prison life now took a more regular character. There was something
immediate to live for. At nine in the morning I had already made
the first three hundred pacings across my cell, and was waiting for
my pencils and pens to be delivered to me. The work which I had
prepared for the Geographical Society contained, beside a report of
my explorations in Finland, a discussion of the bases upon which the
glacial hypothesis ought to rest. Now, knowing that I had plenty of
time before me, I decided to rewrite and enlarge that part of my work.
The Academy of Sciences put its admirable library at my service, and
a corner of my cell soon filled up with books and maps, including the
whole of the excellent Swedish Geological Survey publications, a nearly
full collection of reports of all Arctic travels, and whole sets of
the _Quarterly Journal of the London Geological Society_. My book grew
in the fortress to the size of two large volumes. The first of them
was printed by my brother and Polakóff (in the Geographical Society’s
Memoirs); while the second, not quite finished, remained in the hands
of the Third Section when I ran away. The manuscript was only found in
1895, and given to the Russian Geographical Society, by whom it was
forwarded to me in London.

At five in the afternoon--at three in the winter--as soon as the
tiny lamp was brought in, my pencils and pens were taken away, and
I had to stop work. Then I used to read, mostly books of history.
Quite a library had been formed in the fortress by the generations of
political prisoners who had been confined there. I was allowed to add
to the library a number of staple works on Russian history, and with
the books which were brought to me by my relatives I was enabled to
read almost every work and collection of acts and documents bearing
on the Moscow period of the history of Russia. I relished in reading,
not only the Russian annals, especially the admirable annals of the
democratic mediæval republic of Pskov--the best, perhaps, in Europe
for the history of that type of mediæval cities--but all sorts of dry
documents, and even the Lives of the Saints, which occasionally contain
facts of the real life of the masses which cannot be found elsewhere. I
also read during this time a great number of novels, and even arranged
for myself a treat on Christmas Eve. My relatives managed to send
me then the Christmas stories of Dickens, and I spent the festival
laughing and crying over those beautiful creations of the great
novelist.

III

The worst was the silence, as of the grave, which reigned about me.
In vain I knocked on the walls and struck the floor with my foot,
listening for the faintest sound in reply. None was to be heard.
One month passed, then two, three, fifteen months, but there was no
reply to my knocks. We were only six, scattered among thirty-six
casemates--all my arrested comrades being kept in the Litóvskiy Zámok
prison. When the non-commissioned officer entered my cell to take me
out for a walk, and I asked him, ‘What kind of weather have we? Does
it rain?’ he cast a furtive side glance at me, and without saying a
word promptly retired behind the door, where a sentry and another
non-commissioned officer kept watch upon him. The only living being
from whom I could hear even a few words was the governor, who came to
my cell every morning to say ‘good-morning’ and ask whether I wanted to
buy tobacco or paper. I tried to engage him in conversation; but he
also cast furtive glances at the non-commissioned officers who stood
in the half-opened door, as if to say, ‘You see, I am watched, too.’
Pigeons only were not afraid to keep intercourse with me. Every morning
and every afternoon they came to my window to receive through the
gratings their food.

There were no sounds whatever except the squeak of the sentry’s boots,
the hardly perceptible noise of the shutter of the Judas, and the
ringing of the bells on the fortress cathedral. They rang a ‘Lord save
me’ (‘Góspodi pomílui’) every quarter of an hour--one, two, three,
four times. Then, each hour, the big bell struck slowly, with long
intervals between successive strokes. A lugubrious canticle followed,
chimed by the bells, which at every sudden change of temperature went
out of tune, making at such times a horrible cacophony which sounded
like the ringing of bells at a burial. At the gloomy hour of midnight,
the canticle, moreover, was followed by the discordant notes of a ‘God
save the Tsar.’ The ringing lasted a full quarter of an hour; and no
sooner had it come to an end than a new ‘Lord save me’ announced to the
sleepless prisoner that a quarter of an hour of his uselessly spent
life had gone in the meantime, and that many quarters of an hour, and
hours, and days, and months of the same vegetative life would pass,
before his keepers, or, maybe, death, would release him.

Every morning I was taken out for a half-hour’s walk in the prison
yard. This yard was a small pentagon with a narrow pavement round it,
and a little building--the bath house--in the middle. But I liked those
walks.

The need of new impressions is so great in prison that, when I
walked in our narrow yard, I always kept my eyes fixed upon the
high gilt spire of the fortress cathedral. This was the only thing
in my surroundings which changed its aspect, and I liked to see it
glittering like pure gold when the sun shone from a clear blue sky, or
assuming a fairy aspect when a light bluish haze lay upon the town, or
becoming steel gray when dark clouds began to gather.

During these walks, I saw occasionally the daughter of our governor,
a girl of eighteen, as she came out from her father’s apartment and
had to walk a few steps in our yard in order to reach the entrance
gate--the only issue from the building. She always hurried to pass
away, with her eyes cast down, as if she felt ashamed of being the
daughter of a jailor. Her younger brother, on the contrary, a cadet
whom I also saw once or twice in the yard, always looked straight in my
face with such a frank expression of sympathy that I was struck by it,
and even mentioned it to some one after my release. Four or five years
later, when he was already an officer, he was exiled to Siberia. He had
joined the revolutionary party, and must have helped, I suppose, to
carry on correspondence with prisoners in the fortress.

Winter is gloomy at St. Petersburg for those who cannot be out in
the brightly lighted streets. It was still gloomier, of course, in a
casemate. But dampness was even worse than darkness. In order to drive
away moisture the casemate was overheated, and I could not breathe; but
when, at last, I obtained by request, that the temperature should be
kept lower than before, the outer wall became dripping with moisture,
and the paper was as if a pail of water had been poured upon it every
day--the consequence being that I suffered a great deal from rheumatism.

       *       *       *       *       *

With all that I was cheerful, continuing to write and to draw maps in
the darkness, sharpening my lead pencils with a broken piece of glass
which I had managed to get hold of in the yard; I faithfully walked my
five miles a day in the cell, and performed gymnastic feats with my oak
stool. Time went on. But then sorrow crept into my cell and nearly
broke me down. My brother Alexander was arrested.

Toward the end of December 1874, I was allowed an interview with him
and our sister Hélène, in the fortress, in the presence of a gendarme
officer. Interviews, granted at long intervals, always bring both the
prisoner and his relatives into a state of excitement. One sees beloved
faces and hears beloved voices, knowing that the vision will last but
a few moments; one feels so near to the other, and yet so far off, as
there can be no intimate conversation before a stranger, an enemy and
a spy. Besides, my brother and sister felt anxious for my health, upon
which the dark, gloomy winter days and the dampness had already marked
their first effects. We parted with heavy hearts.

A week after that interview, I received, instead of an expected letter
from my brother concerning the printing of my book, a short note from
Polakóff. He informed me that henceforward he would read the proofs,
and that I should have to address to him everything relative to the
printing. From the very tone of the note I understood at once that
something must be wrong with my brother. If it were only illness,
Polakóff would have mentioned it. Days of fearful anxiety came upon
me. Alexander must have been arrested, and I must have been the cause
of it! Life suddenly ceased to have any meaning for me. My walks, my
gymnastics, my work, lost interest. All the day long I went ceaselessly
up and down my cell, thinking of nothing but Alexander’s arrest. For
me, an unmarried man, imprisonment was only personal inconvenience; but
he was married, he passionately loved his wife, and they now had a boy,
upon whom they had concentrated all the love that they had felt for
their first two children.

Worst of all was the incertitude. What could he have done? For what
reason had he been arrested? What were they going to do with him? Weeks
passed; my anxiety became deeper and deeper; but there was no news,
till at last I heard in a roundabout way that he had been arrested for
a letter written to P. L. Lavróff.

I learned the details much later. After his last interview with me
he wrote to his old friend, who at that time was editing a Russian
socialist review, _Forward_, in London. He mentioned in this letter his
fears about my health; he spoke of the many arrests which were made
then in Russia; and he freely expressed his hatred of the despotic
rule. The letter was intercepted at the post office by the Third
Section, and they came on Christmas Eve to search his apartments. They
carried out their search in an even more brutal manner than usual.
After midnight half a dozen men made an irruption into his flat, and
turned everything upside down. The very walls were examined; the sick
child was taken out of its bed, that the bedding and the mattresses
might be inspected. They found nothing--there was nothing to find.

My brother very much resented this search. With his customary
frankness, he said to the gendarme officer who conducted it: ‘Against
you, captain, I have no grievance. You have received little education,
and you hardly understand what you are doing. But you, sir,’ he
continued, turning toward the procureur, ‘you know what part you are
playing in these proceedings. You have received a university education.
You know the law, and you know that you are trampling all law, such as
it is, under your feet, and covering the lawlessness of these men by
your presence; you are simply--a scoundrel!’

They swore hatred against him. They kept him imprisoned in the Third
Section till May. My brother’s child--a charming boy, whom illness
had rendered still more affectionate and intelligent--was dying from
consumption. The doctors said he had only a few days more to live.
Alexander, who had never asked any favour of his enemies, asked them
this time to permit him to see his child for the last time. He begged
to be allowed to go home for one hour, upon his word of honour to
return, or to be taken there under escort. They refused. They could not
deny themselves that vengeance.

The child died, and its mother was thrown once more into a state
bordering on insanity when my brother was told that he was to be
transported to East Siberia, to a small town, Minusínsk. He would
travel in a cart between two gendarmes, and his wife might follow
later, but could not travel with him.

‘Tell me, at least, what is my crime,’ he demanded; but there was
no accusation of any sort against him beyond the letter. This
transportation appeared so arbitrary, so much an act of mere revenge
on the part of the Third Section, that none of our relatives could
believe that the exile would last more than a few months. My brother
lodged a complaint with the Minister of the Interior. The reply was
that the minister could not interfere with the will of the chief of the
gendarmes. Another complaint was lodged with the Senate. It was of no
avail.

A couple of years later, our sister Hélène, acting on her own
initiative, wrote a petition to the Tsar. Our cousin Dmítri,
Governor-general of Khárkoff, aide-de-camp of the Emperor and a
favourite at the court, also deeply incensed at this treatment by the
Third Section, handed the petition personally to the Tsar, and in so
doing added a few words in support of it. But the vindictiveness of
the Románoffs was a family trait strongly developed in Alexander II.
He wrote upon the petition, ‘Pust posidít’ (Let him remain some time
more). My brother stayed in Siberia twelve years, and never returned to
Russia.

IV

The countless arrests which were made in the summer of 1874, and the
serious turn which was given by the police to the prosecution of our
circle, produced a deep change in the opinions of Russian youth. Up to
that time the prevailing idea had been to pick out among the workers,
and eventually the peasants, a number of men who should be prepared to
become socialistic agitators. But the factories were now flooded with
spies, and it was evident that, do what they might, both propagandists
and workers would very soon be arrested and hidden for ever in Siberia.
Then began a great movement ‘to the people’ in a new form, when several
hundred young men and women, disregarding all precautions hitherto
taken, rushed to the country, and, travelling through the towns and
villages, incited the masses to revolution, almost openly distributing
pamphlets, songs, and proclamations. In our circles this summer
received the name of ‘the mad summer.’

The gendarmes lost their heads. They had not hands enough to make the
arrests nor eyes enough to trace the steps of every propagandist. Yet
not less than fifteen hundred persons were arrested during this hunt,
and half of them were kept in prison for years.

One day in the summer of 1875, in the cell that was next to mine I
distinctly heard the light steps of heeled boots, and a few minutes
later I caught fragments of a conversation. A feminine voice spoke from
the cell, and a deep bass voice--evidently that of the sentry--grunted
something in reply. Then I recognized the sound of the colonel’s spurs,
his rapid steps, his swearing at the sentry, and the click of the key
in the lock. He said something, and a feminine voice loudly replied:
‘We did not talk. I only asked him to call the non-commissioned
officer.’ Then the door was locked, and I heard the colonel swearing in
whispers at the sentry.

So I was alone no more. I had a lady neighbour, who at once broke down
the severe discipline which had hitherto reigned amongst the soldiers.
From that day the walls of the fortress, which had been mute during the
last fifteen months, became animated. From all sides I heard knocks
with the foot on the floor: one, two, three, four, ... eleven knocks;
twenty-four knocks, fifteen knocks; then an interruption, followed by
three knocks and a long succession of thirty-three knocks. Over and
over again these knocks were repeated in the same succession, until
the neighbour would guess at last that they were meant for ‘Kto vy?’
(Who are you?), the letter _v_ being the third letter in our alphabet.
Thereupon conversation was soon established, and usually was conducted
in the abridged alphabet; that is, the alphabet being divided into six
rows of five letters, each letter is marked by its row and its place in
the row.

I discovered with great pleasure that I had at my left my friend
Serdukóff, with whom I could soon talk about everything, especially
when we used our cipher. But intercourse with men brought its
sufferings as well as its joys. Underneath me was lodged a peasant,
whom Serdukóff knew. He talked to him by means of knocks; and even
against my will, often unconsciously during my work, I followed their
conversations. I also spoke to him. Now, if solitary confinement
without any sort of work is hard for educated men, it is infinitely
harder for a peasant who is accustomed to physical work, and not at
all wont to spend years in reading. Our peasant friend felt quite
miserable, and having been kept for nearly two years in another
prison before he was brought to the fortress--his crime was that he
had listened to socialists--he was already broken down. Soon I began
to notice, to my terror, that from time to time his mind wandered.
Gradually his thoughts grew more and more confused, and we two
perceived, step by step, day by day, evidences that his reason was
failing, until his talk became at last that of a lunatic. Frightful
noises and wild cries came next from the lower story; our neighbour was
mad, but was still kept for several months in the casemate before he
was removed to an asylum, from which he never emerged. To witness the
destruction of a man’s mind, under such conditions, was terrible. I
am sure it must have contributed to increase the nervous irritability
of my good and true friend Serdukóff. When, after four years’
imprisonment, he was acquitted by the court and released, he shot
himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day I received a quite unexpected visit. The Grand Duke Nicholas,
brother of Alexander II., who was inspecting the fortress, entered
my cell, followed only by his aide-de-camp. The door was shut behind
him. He rapidly approached me, saying, ‘Good-day, Kropótkin.’ He knew
me personally, and spoke in a familiar, good-natured tone, as to an
old acquaintance. ‘How is it possible, Kropótkin, that you, a page de
chambre, a sergeant of the corps of pages, should be mixed up in this
business, and now be here in this horrible casemate?’

‘Every one has his own opinions,’ was my reply.

‘Opinions! So your opinions were that you must stir up a revolution?’

What was I to reply? Yes? Then the construction which would be put
upon my answer would be that I, who had refused to give any answers to
the gendarmes, ‘avowed everything’ before the brother of the Tsar. His
tone was that of a commander of a military school when trying to obtain
‘avowals’ from a cadet. Yet I could not say ‘No’: it would have been a
lie. I did not know what to say, and stood without saying anything.

‘You see! You feel ashamed of it now’--

This remark angered me, and I at once said in a rather sharp way, ‘I
have given my replies to the examining magistrate, and have nothing
more to add.’

‘But understand, Kropótkin, please,’ he said then in the most familiar
tone, ‘that I don’t speak to you as an examining magistrate. I speak
quite as a private person--quite as a private man,’ he repeated,
lowering his voice.

Thoughts went whirling in my head. To play the part of Marquis Posa?
To tell the emperor through the grand duke of the desolation of
Russia, the ruin of the peasantry, the arbitrariness of the officials,
the terrible famines in prospect? To say that we wanted to help the
peasants out of their desperate condition, to make them raise their
heads--and by all this try to influence Alexander II.? These thoughts
followed one another in rapid succession, till at last I said to
myself: ‘Never! Nonsense! They know all that. They are enemies of the
nation, and such talk would not change them.’

I replied that he always remained an official person, and that I could
not look upon him as a private man.

He then began to ask me indifferent questions. ‘Was it not in Siberia,
with the Decembrists, that you began to entertain such ideas?’

‘No; I knew only one Decembrist, and with him I had no conversation
worth speaking of.’

‘Was it then at St. Petersburg that you got them?’

‘I was always the same.’

‘Why! Were you such in the corps of pages?’ he asked me with terror.

‘In the corps I was a boy, and what is indefinite in boyhood grows
definite in manhood.’

He asked me some other similar questions, and as he spoke I distinctly
saw what he was driving at. He was trying to obtain avowals, and my
imagination vividly pictured him saying to his brother: ‘All these
examining magistrates are imbeciles. He gave them no replies, but I
talked to him ten minutes, and he told me everything.’ That began to
annoy me; and when he said to me something to this effect, ‘How could
you have anything to do with all these people--peasants and people
with no names?’--I sharply turned upon him and said, ‘I have told you
already that I have given my replies to the examining magistrate.’ Then
he abruptly left the cell.

Later, the soldiers of the guard made quite a legend of that visit.
The person who came in a carriage to carry me away at the time of my
escape wore a military cap, and, having sandy whiskers, bore a faint
resemblance to the Grand Duke Nicholas. So a tradition grew up amongst
the soldiers of the St. Petersburg garrison that it was the grand
duke himself who came to rescue me and kidnapped me. Thus are legends
created even in times of newspapers and biographical dictionaries.

V

Two years had passed. Several of my comrades had died, several had
become insane, but nothing was heard yet of our case coming before a
court.

My health gave way before the end of the second year. The oak stool now
seemed heavy in my hand, and the five miles became an endless distance.
As there were about sixty of us in the fortress, and the winter days
were short, we were taken out for a walk in the yard for twenty minutes
only every third day. I did my best to maintain my energy, but the
‘arctic wintering’ without an interruption in the summer got the better
of me. I had brought back from my Siberian journeys slight symptoms
of scurvy; now, in the darkness and dampness of the casemate, they
developed more distinctly; that scourge of the prisons had got hold of
me.

In March or April 1876, we were at last told that the Third Section had
completed the preliminary inquest. The ‘case’ had been transmitted to
the judicial authorities, and consequently we were removed to a prison
attached to the court of justice--the House of Detention.

It was an immense show prison, recently built on the model of the
French and Belgian prisons, consisting of four stories of small cells,
each of which had a window overlooking an inner yard and a door opening
on an iron balcony; the balconies of the several stories were connected
by iron staircases.

For most of my comrades the transfer to this prison was a great relief.
There was much more life in it than in the fortress; more opportunity
for correspondence, for seeing one’s relatives, and for mutual
intercourse. Tapping on the walls continued all day long undisturbed,
and I was able in this way to relate to a young neighbour the history
of the Paris Commune from the beginning to the end. It took, however, a
whole week’s tapping.

As to my health, it grew even worse than it had lately been in the
fortress. I could not bear the close atmosphere of the tiny cell, which
measured only four steps from one corner to another, and where, as soon
as the steam-pipes were set to work, the temperature changed from a
glacial cold to an unbearable heat. Having to turn so often, I became
giddy after a few minutes’ walk, and ten minutes of outdoor exercise,
in the corner of a yard inclosed between high brick walls, did not
refresh me in the least. As to the prison doctor, who did not want to
hear the word ‘scurvy’ pronounced ‘in his prison,’ the less said of him
the better.

I was allowed to receive food from home, it so happening that one of my
relatives, married to a lawyer, lived a few doors from the court. But
my digestion had become so bad that I was soon able to eat nothing but
a small piece of bread and one or two eggs a day. My strength rapidly
failed, and the general opinion was that I should not live more than
a few months. When climbing the staircase which led to my cell in the
second story, I had to stop two or three times to rest, and I remember
an elderly soldier from the escort once commiserating me and saying,
‘Poor man, you won’t live till the end of the summer.’

My relatives now became very much alarmed. My sister Hélène tried to
obtain my release on bail, but the procureur, Shúbin, replied to her,
with a sardonic smile, ‘If you bring me a doctor’s certificate that he
will die in ten days, I will release him.’ He had the satisfaction of
seeing my sister fall into a chair and sob aloud in his presence. She
succeeded, however, in gaining her request that I should be visited by
a good physician--the chief doctor of the military hospital of the St.
Petersburg garrison. He was a bright, intelligent, aged general, who
examined me in the most scrupulous manner, and concluded that I had no
organic disease, but was suffering simply from a want of oxidation of
the blood. ‘Air is all that you want,’ he said. Then he stood a few
minutes in hesitation, and added in a decided manner, ‘No use talking,
you cannot remain here; you must be transferred.’

Some ten days later I was transferred to the military hospital, which
is situated on the outskirts of St. Petersburg, and has a special small
prison for the officers and soldiers who fall ill when they are under
trial. Two of my comrades had already been removed to this hospital
prison, when it was certain that they would soon die of consumption.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the hospital I began at once to recover. I was given a spacious
room on the ground floor, close by the room of the military guard. It
had an immense grated window looking south, which opened on a small
boulevard with two rows of trees; and beyond the boulevard there was a
wide space where two hundred carpenters were engaged in building wooden
shanties for typhoid patients. Every evening they gave an hour or so to
singing in chorus--such a chorus as is formed only in large carpenters’
_artéls_. A sentry marched up and down the boulevard, his box standing
opposite my room.

My window was kept open all the day, and I basked in the rays of the
sun, which I had missed for such a long time. I breathed the balmy
air of May with a full chest, and my health improved rapidly--too
rapidly, I began to think. I was soon able to digest light food, gained
strength, and resumed my work with renewed energy. Seeing no way how I
could finish the second volume of my work, I wrote a _résumé_ of it,
which was printed in the first volume.

In the fortress I had heard from a comrade who had been in the hospital
prison that it would not be hard for me to escape from it, and I made
my presence there known to my friends. However, escape proved far more
difficult than I had been led to believe. A stricter supervision than
had ever before been heard of was exercised over me. The sentry in the
passage was placed at my door, and I was never let out of my room.
The hospital soldiers and the officers of the guard who occasionally
entered it seemed to be afraid to stay more than a minute or two.

Various plans were made by my friends to liberate me--some of them
very amusing. I was, for instance, to file through the iron bars of
my window. Then, on a rainy night, when the sentry on the boulevard
was dozing in his box, two friends were to creep up from behind and
overturn the box, so that it would fall upon the sentry and catch him
like a mouse in a trap, without hurting him. In the meantime, I was to
jump out of the window. But a better solution came in an unexpected way.

‘Ask to be let out for a walk,’ one of the soldiers whispered to me one
day. I did so. The doctor supported my demand, and every afternoon, at
four, I was allowed to take an hour’s walk in the prison yard. I had to
keep on the green flannel dressing-gown which is worn by the hospital
patients, but my boots, my vest, and my trousers were delivered to me
every day.

I shall never forget my first walk. When I was taken out, I saw before
me a yard fully three hundred paces long and more than two hundred
paces wide, all covered with grass. The gate was open, and through it
I could see the street, the immense hospital opposite, and the people
who passed by. I stopped on the doorsteps of the prison, unable for a
moment to move when I saw that yard and that gate.

At one end of the yard stood the prison--a narrow building, about one
hundred and fifty paces long--at each end of which was a sentry-box.
The two sentries paced up and down in front of the building, and had
tramped out a footpath in the green. Along this footpath I was told to
walk, and the two sentries continued to walk up and down--so that I was
never more than ten or fifteen paces from the one or the other. Three
hospital soldiers took their seats on the doorsteps.

At the opposite end of this spacious yard wood for fuel was being
unloaded from a dozen carts, and piled up along the wall by a dozen
peasants. The whole yard was inclosed by a high fence made of thick
boards. Its gate was open to let the carts in and out.

This open gate fascinated me. ‘I must not stare at it,’ I said to
myself; and yet I looked at it all the time. As soon as I was taken
back to my cell I wrote to my friends to communicate to them the
welcome news. ‘I feel well-nigh unable to use the cipher,’ I wrote with
a tremulous hand, tracing almost illegible signs instead of figures.
‘This nearness of liberty makes me tremble as if I were in a fever.
They took me out to-day in the yard; its gate was open, and no sentry
near it. Through this unguarded gate I will run out; my sentries will
not catch me’--and I gave the plan of the escape. ‘A lady is to come in
an open carriage to the hospital. She is to alight, and the carriage
to wait for her in the street, some fifty paces from the gate. When I
am taken out at four, I shall walk for a while with my hat in my hand,
and somebody who passes by the gate will take it as a signal that all
is right within the prison. Then you must return a signal: “The street
is clear.” Without it I shall not start: once beyond the gate I must
not be recaptured. Light or sound only can be used for your signal. The
coachman may send a flash of light--the sun’s rays reflected from his
lacquered hat upon the main hospital building; or, still better, the
sound of a song that goes on as long as the street is clear; unless
you can occupy the little gray bungalow which I see from the yard, and
signal to me from its window. The sentry will run after me like a dog
after a hare, describing a curve, while I run in a straight line, and
I _will_ keep five or ten paces in advance of him. In the street, I
shall spring into the carriage and we shall gallop away. If the sentry
shoots--well, that cannot be helped; it lies beyond our foresight; and
then, against a certain death in prison, the thing is well worth the
risk.’

Counter proposals were made, but that plan was ultimately adopted. The
matter was taken in hand by our circle; people who never had known me
entered into it, as if it were the release of the dearest of their
brothers. However, the attempt was beset with difficulties, and time
went with terrible rapidity. I worked hard, writing late at night; but
my health improved, nevertheless, at a speed which I found appalling.
When I was let out into the yard for the first time, I could only creep
like a tortoise along the footpath; now I felt strong enough to run.
True, I continued to go at the same tortoise pace, lest my walks should
be stopped; but my natural vivacity might betray me at any moment. And
my comrades, in the meantime, had to enlist more than a score of people
in the affair, to find a reliable horse and an experienced coachman,
and to arrange hundreds of unforeseen details which always spring up
around such conspiracies. The preparations took a month or so, and any
day I might be moved back to the House of Detention.

At last the day of the escape was settled. June 29, old style, is
the day of St. Peter and St. Paul. My friends, throwing a touch of
sentimentalism into their enterprise, wanted to set me free on that
day. They had let me know that in reply to my signal ‘All right within’
they would signal ‘All right outside’ by sending up a red toy balloon.
Then the carriage would come, and a song would be sung to let me know
when the street was open.

I went out on the 29th, took off my hat, and waited for the balloon.
But nothing of the kind was to be seen. Half an hour passed. I heard
the rumble of a carriage in the street; I heard a man’s voice singing a
song unknown to me; but there was no balloon.

The hour was over, and with a broken heart I returned to my room.
‘Something must have gone wrong,’ I said to myself.

The impossible had happened that day. Hundreds of children’s balloons
are always on sale in St. Petersburg, near the Gostínoi Dvor. That
morning there were none; not a single balloon was to be found. One was
discovered at last, in the possession of a child, but it was old and
would not fly. My friends rushed then to an optician’s shop, bought
an apparatus for making hydrogen, and filled the balloon with it; but
it would not fly any better: the hydrogen had not been dried. Time
pressed. Then a lady attached the balloon to her umbrella, and, holding
the latter high above her head, walked up and down in the street
alongside the high wall of our yard; but I saw nothing of it; the wall
being too high, and the lady too short.

As it turned out, nothing could have been better than that accident
with the balloon. When the hour of my walk had passed, the carriage
was driven along the streets which it was intended to follow after the
escape; and there, in a narrow street, it was stopped by a dozen or
more carts which were carrying wood to the hospital. The horses of the
carts got into disorder--some of them on the right side of the street,
and some on the left--and the carriage had to make its way at a slow
pace amongst them; at a turning it was actually blocked. If I had been
in it, we should have been caught.

Now a whole system of signals was established along the streets through
which we should have to go after the escape, in order to give notice
if the streets were not clear. For a couple of miles from the hospital
my comrades took the position of sentries. One was to walk up and down
with a handkerchief in his hand, which at the approach of the carts
he was to put into his pocket; another was to sit on a stone and eat
cherries, stopping when the carts came near; and so on. All these
signals, transmitted along the streets, were finally to reach the
carriage. My friends had also hired the gray bungalow that I could see
from the yard, and at an open window of that little house a violinist
stood with his violin, ready to play when the signal, ‘Street clear,’
reached him.

The attempt had been settled for the next day. Further postponement
would have been dangerous. In fact, the carriage had been taken notice
of by the hospital people, and something suspicious must have reached
the ears of the authorities, as on the night before my escape I heard
the patrol officer ask the sentry who stood opposite my window, ‘Where
are your ball cartridges?’ The soldier began to take them in a clumsy
way out of his cartridge pouch, spending a couple of minutes before
he got them. The patrol officer swore at him. ‘Have you not been told
to-night to keep four ball cartridges in the pocket of your coat?’ And
he stood by the sentry till the latter put four cartridges into his
pocket. ‘Look sharp!’ he said as he turned away.

The new arrangements concerning the signals had to be communicated
to me at once; and at two on the next day a lady--a dear relative of
mine--came to the prison, asking that a watch might be transmitted to
me. Everything had to go through the hands of the procureur; but as
this was simply a watch, without a box, it was passed along. In it was
a tiny cipher note which contained the whole plan. When I saw it I was
seized with terror, so daring was the feat. The lady, herself under
pursuit by the police for political reasons, would have been arrested
on the spot, if anyone had chanced to open the lid of the watch. But I
saw her calmly leave the prison and move slowly along the boulevard.

I came out at four, as usual, and gave my signal. I heard next the
rumble of the carriage, and a few minutes later the tones of the violin
in the gray house sounded through our yard. But I was then at the other
end of the building. When I got back to the end of my path which was
nearest the gate--about a hundred paces from it--the sentry was close
upon my heels. ‘One turn more,’ I thought--but before I reached the
farther end of the path the violin suddenly ceased playing.

More than a quarter of an hour passed, full of anxiety, before I
understood the cause of the interruption. Then a dozen heavily loaded
carts entered the gate and moved to the other end of the yard.

Immediately the violinist--a good one, I must say--began a wildly
exciting mazurka from Kontsky, as if to say, ‘Straight on now--this is
your time!’ I moved slowly to the nearer end of the footpath, trembling
at the thought that the mazurka might stop before I reached it.

When I was there I turned round. The sentry had stopped five or six
paces behind me; he was looking the other way. ‘Now or never!’ I
remember that thought flashing through my head. I flung off my green
flannel dressing-gown and began to run.

For many days in succession I had practised how to get rid of that
immeasurably long and cumbrous garment. It was so long that I carried
the lower part on my left arm, as ladies carry the trains of their
riding habits. Do what I might, it would not come off in one movement.
I cut the seams under the armpits, but that did not help. Then I
decided to learn to throw it off in two movements: one, casting the
end from my arm, the other dropping the gown on the floor. I practised
patiently in my room until I could do it as neatly as soldiers handle
their rifles. ‘One, two,’ and it was on the ground.

I did not trust much to my vigour, and began to run rather slowly, to
economize my strength. But no sooner had I taken a few steps than the
peasants who were piling the wood at the other end shouted, ‘He runs!
Stop him! Catch him!’ and they hastened to intercept me at the gate.
Then I flew for my life. I thought of nothing but running--not even of
the pit which the carts had dug out at the gate. Run! run! full speed!

The sentry, I was told later by the friends who witnessed the scene
from the gray house, ran after me, followed by three soldiers who had
been sitting on the doorsteps. The sentry was so near to me that he
felt sure of catching me. Several times he flung his rifle forward,
trying to give me a blow in the back with the bayonet. One moment my
friends in the window thought he had me. He was so convinced that he
could stop me in this way that he did not fire. But I kept my distance,
and he had to give up at the gate.

Safe out of the gate, I perceived, to my terror, that the carriage was
occupied by a civilian who wore a military cap. He sat without turning
his head to me. ‘Sold!’ was my first thought. The comrades had written
in their last letter, ‘Once in the street, don’t give yourself up:
there will be friends to defend you in case of need,’ and I did not
want to jump into the carriage if it was occupied by an enemy. However,
as I got nearer to the carriage I noticed that the man in it had sandy
whiskers which seemed to be those of a warm friend of mine. He did
not belong to our circle, but we were personal friends, and on more
than one occasion I had learned to know his admirable, daring courage,
and how his strength suddenly became herculean when there was danger
at hand. ‘Why should he be there? Is it possible?’ I reflected, and
was going to shout out his name, when I caught myself in good time,
and instead clapped my hands, while still running, to attract his
attention. He turned his face to me--and I knew who it was.

‘Jump in, quick, quick!’ he shouted in a terrible voice, calling me
and the coachman all sorts of names, a revolver in his hand and ready
to shoot. ‘Gallop! gallop! I will kill you!’ he cried to the coachman.
The horse--a beautiful racing trotter, which had been bought on
purpose--started at full gallop. Scores of voices yelling, ‘Hold them!
Get them!’ resounded behind us, my friend meanwhile helping me to put
on an elegant overcoat and an opera hat. But the real danger was not so
much in the pursuers as in a soldier who was posted at the gate of the
hospital, about opposite to the spot where the carriage had to wait.
He could have prevented my jumping into the carriage or could have
stopped the horse by simply rushing a few steps forward. A friend was
consequently commissioned to divert this soldier by talking. He did
this most successfully. The soldier having been employed at one time
in the laboratory of the hospital, my friend gave a scientific turn to
their chat, speaking about the microscope and the wonderful things one
sees through it. Referring to a certain parasite of the human body, he
asked, ‘Did you ever see what a formidable tail it has?’ ‘What, man, a
tail?’ ‘Yes it has; under the microscope it is as big as that.’ ‘Don’t
tell me any of your tales!’ retorted the soldier. ‘I know better. It
was the first thing I looked at under the microscope.’ This animated
discussion took place just as I ran past them and sprang into the
carriage. It sounds like fable, but it is fact.

The carriage turned sharply into a narrow lane, past the same wall of
the yard where the peasants had been piling wood, and which all of them
had now deserted in their run after me. The turn was so sharp that the
carriage was nearly upset, when I flung myself inward, dragging toward
me my friend; this sudden movement righted the carriage.

We trotted through the narrow lane and then turned to the left. Two
gendarmes were standing there, at the door of a public-house, and gave
to the military cap of my companion the military salute. ‘Hush! hush!’
I said to him, for he was still terribly excited. ‘All goes well; the
gendarmes salute us!’ The coachman thereupon turned his face toward me,
and I recognized in him another friend, who smiled with happiness.

Everywhere we saw friends, who winked to us or gave us a Godspeed as
we passed at the full trot of our beautiful horse. Then we entered the
large Nevsky Perspective, turned into a side street, and alighted at a
door, sending away the coachman. I ran up the staircase, and at its top
fell into the arms of my sister-in-law, who had been waiting in painful
anxiety. She laughed and cried at the same time, bidding me hurry to
put on another dress and to crop my conspicuous beard. Ten minutes
later my friend and I left the house and took a cab.

In the meantime the officer of the guard at the prison and the hospital
soldiers had rushed out into the street, doubtful as to what measures
they should take. There was not a cab for a mile round, every one
having been hired by my friends. An old peasant woman from the crowd
was wiser than all the lot. ‘Poor people,’ she said, as if talking to
herself, ‘they are sure to come out on the Perspective, and there they
will be caught if somebody runs along that lane, which leads straight
to the Perspective.’ She was quite right, and the officer ran to the
tramway car which stood close by, and asked the men to let him have
their horses to send somebody on horseback to the Perspective. But the
men obstinately refused to give up their horses, and the officer did
not use force.

As to the violinist and the lady who had taken the gray house, they too
rushed out and joined the crowd with the old woman, whom they heard
giving advice, and when the crowd dispersed they quietly went away.

It was a fine afternoon. We drove to the islands where the St.
Petersburg aristocracy go on bright spring days to see the sunset, and
called on the way, in a remote street, at a barber’s shop to shave off
my beard, which operation changed me, of course, but not very much. We
drove aimlessly up and down the islands, but, having been told not to
reach our night quarters till late in the evening, did not know where
to go. ‘What shall we do in the meantime?’ I asked my friend. He also
pondered over that question. ‘To Donon’s!’ he suddenly called out to
the cabman, naming one of the best St. Petersburg restaurants. ‘No one
will ever think of looking for you at Donon’s,’ he calmly remarked.
‘They will hunt for you everywhere else, but not there; and we shall
have a dinner, and a drink, too, in honour of your successful escape.’

What could I reply to so reasonable a suggestion? So we went to
Donon’s, passed the halls flooded with light and crowded with visitors
at the dinner hour, and took a separate room, where we spent the
evening till the time came when we were expected. The house where we
had first alighted was searched less than two hours after we left, as
were also the apartments of nearly all our friends. Nobody thought of
making a search at Donon’s.

A couple of days later I was to take possession of an apartment which
had been engaged for me, and which I could occupy under a false
passport. But the lady who was to take me in a carriage to that house
took the precaution of visiting it first by herself. It was densely
surrounded by spies. So many of my friends had come to inquire whether
I was safe there that the suspicions of the police had been aroused.
Moreover, my portrait had been printed by the Third Section, and
hundreds of copies had been distributed to policemen and watchmen. All
the detectives who knew me by sight were looking for me in the streets;
while those who did not were accompanied by soldiers and warders who
had seen me during my imprisonment. The Tsar was furious that such an
escape should have taken place in his capital in full daylight, and had
given the order, ‘He _must_ be found.’

It was impossible to remain at St. Petersburg, and I concealed myself
in country houses in its neighbourhood. In company with half-a-dozen
friends, I stayed at a village frequented at this time of the year by
St. Petersburg people bent on picnicking. Then it was decided that I
should go abroad. But from a foreign paper we had learned that all the
frontier stations and the railway termini in the Baltic provinces and
Finland were closely watched by detectives who knew me by sight. So I
determined to travel in a direction where I should be least expected.
Armed with the passport of a friend, and accompanied by another friend,
I crossed Finland, and went northward to a remote port on the Gulf of
Bothnia, whence I crossed to Sweden.

After I had gone on board the steamer, and it was about to sail,
the friend who was to accompany me to the frontier told me the St.
Petersburg news, which he had promised our friends not to tell me
before. My sister Hélène had been arrested, as well as the sister of
my brother’s wife, who had visited me in prison once a month after my
brother and his wife went to Siberia.

My sister knew absolutely nothing of the preparations for my escape.
Only after I had escaped a friend had hurried to her, to tell her
the welcome news. She protested her ignorance in vain: she was taken
from her children, and was kept imprisoned for a fortnight. As to the
sister of my brother’s wife, she had known vaguely that something
was to be attempted, but she had had no part in the preparations.
Common sense ought to have shown the authorities that a person who
had officially visited me in prison would not be involved in such an
affair. Nevertheless, she was kept in prison for over two months. Her
husband, a well-known lawyer, vainly endeavoured to obtain her release.
‘We are aware now,’ he was told by the gendarme officers, ‘that she has
had nothing to do with the escape; but, you see, we reported to the
emperor, on the day we arrested her, that the person who had organized
the escape was discovered and arrested. It will now take some time
to prepare the emperor to accept the idea that she is not the real
culprit.’

I crossed Sweden without stopping anywhere, and went to Christiania,
where I waited a few days for a steamer to sail for Hull, gathering
information in the meantime about the peasant party of the Norwegian
Storthing. As I went to the steamer I asked myself with anxiety, ‘Under
which flag does she sail--Norwegian, German, English?’ Then I saw
floating above the stern the Union Jack--the flag under which so many
refugees, Russian, Italian, French, Hungarian, and of all nations, have
found an asylum. I greeted that flag from the depth of my heart.

PART SIXTH

WESTERN EUROPE

I

A storm raged in the North Sea, as we approached the coasts of England.
But I met the storm with delight. I enjoyed the struggle of our steamer
against the furiously rolling waves, and sat for hours on the stem,
the foam of the waves dashing into my face. After the two years I had
spent in a gloomy casemate, every fibre of my inner self seemed to be
throbbing with life, and eager to enjoy the full intensity of life.

My intention was not to stay abroad more than a few weeks or months;
just enough time to allow the hue and cry caused by my escape to
subside, and also to restore my health a little. I landed under the
name of Lavashóff, the name under which I had left Russia; and,
avoiding London, where the spies of the Russian embassy would soon have
been at my heels, I went first to Edinburgh.

It has, however, so happened that I have never returned to Russia. I
was soon taken up by the wave of the anarchist movement, which was
just then rising in Western Europe; and I felt that I should be more
useful in helping that movement to find its proper expression than I
could possibly be in Russia. In my mother country I was too well known
to carry on an open propaganda, especially among the workers and the
peasants; and later on, when the Russian movement became a conspiracy
and an armed struggle against the representative of autocracy, all
thought of a popular movement was necessarily abandoned; while my
own inclinations drew me more and more intensely toward casting in
my lot with the labouring and toiling masses. To bring to them such
conceptions as would aid them to direct their efforts to the best
advantage of all the workers; to deepen and to widen the ideals and
principles which will underlie the coming social revolution; to
develop these ideals and principles before the workers, not as an
order coming from their leaders, but as a result of their own reason;
and so to awaken their own initiative, now that they were called upon
to appear in the historical arena as the builders of a new, equitable
mode of organization of society--this seemed to me as necessary for
the development of mankind as anything I could accomplish in Russia
at that time. Accordingly, I joined the few men who were working in
that direction in Western Europe, relieving those of them who had been
broken down by years of hard struggle.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I landed at Hull and went to Edinburgh I informed but a few
friends in Russia and in the Jura Federation of my safe arrival in
England. A socialist must always rely upon his own work for his living,
and consequently, as soon as I was settled in the Scotch capital in a
small room in the suburbs, I tried to find some work.

Among the passengers on board our steamer there was a Norwegian
professor, with whom I talked, trying to remember the little that I
formerly had known of the Swedish language. He spoke German. ‘But as
you speak some Norwegian,’ he said to me, ‘and are trying to learn it,
let us both speak it.’

‘You mean Swedish?’ I ventured to ask, ‘I speak Swedish, don’t I?’

‘Well, I should rather say Norwegian; certainly not Swedish,’ was his
reply.

Thus happened to me what happened to one of Jules Verne’s heroes, who
had learned by mistake Portuguese instead of Spanish. At any rate,
I talked a good deal with the professor--let it be Norwegian--and
he gave me a Christiania paper, which contained the reports of the
Norwegian North Atlantic deep-sea expedition, just returned home. As
soon as I reached Edinburgh I wrote a note in English about these
explorations, and sent it to ‘Nature,’ which my brother and I used
regularly to read at St. Petersburg from its first appearance. The
sub-editor acknowledged the note with thanks, remarking with an
extreme leniency which I have often met with since in England, that
my English was ‘all right’ and only required to be ‘a little more
idiomatic.’ I may say that I had learned English in Russia, and, with
my brother, had translated Page’s ‘Philosophy of Geology’ and Herbert
Spencer’s ‘Principles of Biology.’ But I had learned it from books,
and pronounced it very badly, so that I had the greatest difficulty in
making myself understood by my Scotch landlady; her daughter and I used
to write on scraps of paper what we had to say to each other; and as
I had no idea of idiomatic English, I must have made the most amusing
mistakes. I remember, at any rate, protesting once to her, in writing,
that it was not a ‘cup of tea’ that I expected at tea time, but many
cups. I am afraid my landlady took me for a glutton, but I must say,
by way of apology, that neither in the geological books I had read in
English nor in Spencer’s ‘Biology’ was there any allusion to such an
important matter as tea-drinking.

I got from Russia the Journal of the Russian Geographical Society,
and soon began to supply the ‘Times’ also with occasional paragraphs
about Russian geographical explorations. Prjeválsky was at that time in
Central Asia, and his progress was followed in England with interest.

However, the money I had brought with me was rapidly disappearing, and
all my letters to Russia being intercepted, I could not succeed in
making my address known to my relatives. So I moved in a few weeks to
London, thinking I could find more regular work there. The old refugee,
P. L. Lavróff, continued to edit at London his newspaper _Forward_; but
as I hoped soon to return to Russia, and the editorial office of the
Russian paper must have been closely watched by spies, I did not go
there.

I went, very naturally, to the office of ‘Nature,’ where I was most
cordially received by the sub-editor, Mr. J. Scott Keltie. The editor
wanted to increase the column of Notes, and found that I wrote them
exactly as they were required. A table was consequently assigned me
in the office, and scientific reviews in all possible languages were
piled upon it. ‘Come every Monday, Mr. Levashóff,’ I was told, ‘look
over these reviews, and if there is any article that strikes you as
worthy of notice, write a note, or mark the article: we will send it
to a specialist.’ Mr. Keltie did not know, of course, that I used to
rewrite each note three or four times before I dared to submit my
English to him; but taking the scientific reviews home, I soon managed
very nicely, with my ‘Nature’ notes and my ‘Times’ paragraphs, to get a
living. I found that the weekly payment, on Thursday, of the paragraph
contributors to the ‘Times’ was an excellent institution. To be sure,
there were weeks when there was no interesting news from Prjeválsky,
and news from other parts of Russia was not found interesting; in such
cases my fare was bread and tea only.

One day, however, Mr. Keltie took from the shelves several Russian
books, asking me to review them for ‘Nature.’ I looked at the books,
and, to my embarrassment, saw that they were my own works on the
Glacial Period and the Orography of Asia. My brother had not failed to
send them to our favourite ‘Nature.’ I was in great perplexity, and,
putting the books into my bag, took them home, to reflect upon the
matter. ‘What shall I do with them?’ I asked myself. ‘I cannot praise
them, because they are mine; and I cannot be too sharp on the author,
as I hold the views expressed in them.’ I decided to take them back
next day, and explain to Mr. Keltie that, although I had introduced
myself under the name of Levashóff, I was the author of these books,
and could not review them.

Mr. Keltie knew from the papers about Kropótkin’s escape, and was
very much pleased to discover the refugee safe in England. As to my
scruples, he remarked wisely that I need neither scold nor praise the
author, but could simply tell the readers what the books were about.
From that day a friendship, which still continues, grew up between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

In November or December 1876, seeing in the letter box of P. L.
Lavróff’s paper an invitation for ‘K.’ to call at the editorial office
to receive a letter from Russia, and thinking that the invitation was
for me, I called at the office, and soon established friendship with
the editor and the younger people who printed the paper.

When I called for the first time at the office--my beard shaved and my
top hat on--and asked the lady who opened the door, in my very best
English: ‘Is Mr. Lavróff in?’ I imagined that no one would ever know
who I was as long as I had not mentioned my name. It appeared, however,
that the lady--who did not know me at all, but well knew my brother
while he stayed at Zürich--at once recognized me and ran upstairs to
say who the visitor was. ‘I knew you immediately,’ she said afterwards,
‘by your eyes, which reminded me of those of your brother.’

That time, I did not stay long in England. I was in lively
correspondence with my friend James Guillaume, of the Jura Federation,
and as soon as I found some permanent geographical work, which I could
do in Switzerland as well as in London, I removed to Switzerland. The
letters that I got at last from home told me that I might as well stay
abroad, as there was nothing particular to be done in Russia. A wave of
enthusiasm was rolling over the country at that time in favour of the
Slavonians who had revolted against the age-long Turkish oppression,
and my best friends, Serghéi (Stepniák), Kelnitz, and several others
had gone to the Balkán peninsula to join the insurgents. ‘We read,’
my friends wrote, ‘the “Daily News” correspondence about the horrors
in Bulgaria; we weep at the reading, and go next to enlist either as
volunteers in the Balkán insurgents’ band or as nurses.’

I went to Switzerland, joined the Jura Federation of the International
Workingmen’s Association, and, following the advice of my Swiss
friends, settled in La Chaux-de-Fonds.

II

The Jura Federation has played an important part in the modern
development of socialism.

It always happens that after a political party has set before itself
a purpose, and has proclaimed that nothing short of the complete
attainment of that aim will satisfy it, it divides into two fractions.
One of them remains what it was, while the other, although it professes
not to have changed a word of its previous intentions, accepts some
sort of compromise, and gradually, from compromise to compromise, is
driven farther from its primitive programme, and becomes a party of
modest makeshift reform.

Such a division had occurred within the International Workingmen’s
Association. Nothing less than an expropriation of the present owners
of land and capital, and a transmission of all that is necessary for
the production of wealth to the producers themselves, was the avowed
aim of the Association at the outset. The workers of all nations were
called upon to form their own organizations for a direct struggle
against capitalism; to work out the means of socializing the production
of wealth and its consumption; and, when they should be ready to do so,
to take possession of the necessaries for production, and to control
production with no regard to the present political organization, which
must undergo a complete reconstruction. The Association had thus to be
the means for preparing an immense revolution in men’s minds, and later
on in the very forms of life--a revolution which would open to mankind
a new era of progress based upon the solidarity of all. That was the
ideal which aroused from their slumber millions of European workers,
and attracted to the Association its best intellectual forces.

However, two fractions soon developed. When the war of 1870 had ended
in a complete defeat of France, and the uprising of the Paris Commune
had been crushed, and the Draconian laws which were passed against
the Association excluded the French workers from participation in it;
and when, on the other hand, parliamentary rule had been introduced
in ‘united Germany’--the goal of the Radicals since 1848--an effort
was made by the Germans to modify the aims and the methods of the
whole socialist movement. The ‘conquest of power _within the existing
states_’ became the watchword of that section, which took the name of
‘Social Democracy.’ The first electoral successes of this party at
the elections to the German Reichstag aroused great hopes. The number
of the social democratic deputies having grown from two to seven, and
next to nine, it was confidently calculated by otherwise reasonable
men that before the end of the century the social democrats would
have a majority in the German Parliament, and would then introduce
the socialist ‘popular state’ by means of suitable legislation.
The socialist ideal of this party gradually lost the character of
something that had to be worked out by the labour organizations
themselves, and became state management of the industries--in fact,
state socialism; that is, state capitalism. To-day, in Switzerland,
the efforts of the social democrats are directed in politics toward
centralization as against federalism, and in the economic field to
promoting the state management of railways and the state monopoly of
banking and of the sale of spirits. The state management of the land
and of the leading industries, and even of the consumption of riches,
would be the next step in a more or less distant future.

Gradually, all the life and activity of the German social democratic
party was subordinated to electoral considerations. Trade unions were
treated with contempt and strikes were met with disapproval, because
both diverted the attention of the workers from electoral struggles.
Every popular outbreak, every revolutionary agitation in any country of
Europe, was received by the social democratic leaders with even more
animosity than by the capitalist press.

In the Latin countries, however, this new direction found but few
adherents. The sections and federations of the International remained
true to the principles which had prevailed at the foundation of the
Association. Federalist by their history, hostile to the idea of a
centralized state, and possessed of revolutionary traditions, the Latin
workers could not follow the evolution of the Germans.

The division between the two branches of the socialist movement became
apparent immediately after the Franco-German war. The International, as
I have already mentioned, had created a governing body in the shape of
a general council which resided at London; and the leading spirits of
that council being two Germans, Engels and Marx, the council became the
stronghold of the new social democratic direction; while the inspirers
and intellectual leaders of the Latin federations were Bakúnin and his
friends.

The conflict between the Marxists and the Bakúnists was not a personal
affair. It was the necessary conflict between the principles of
federalism and those of centralization, the free Commune and the
State’s paternal rule, the free action of the masses of the people and
the betterment of existing capitalist conditions through legislation--a
conflict between the Latin spirit and the German _Geist_, which,
after the defeat of France on the battlefield, claimed supremacy in
science, politics, philosophy, and in socialism too, representing
its own conception of socialism as ‘scientific,’ while all other
interpretations it described as ‘utopian.’

At the Hague Congress of the International Association, which was
held in 1872, the London general council, by means of a fictitious
majority, excluded Bakúnin, his friend Guillaume, and even the Jura
Federation from the International. But as it was certain that most
of what remained then of the International--that is, the Spanish,
the Italian, and the Belgian Federations--would side with the
Jurassians, the congress tried to dissolve the Association. A new
general council, composed of a few social democrats, was nominated in
New York, where there were no workmen’s organizations belonging to
the Association to control it, and where it has never been heard of
since. In the meantime, the Spanish, the Italian, the Belgian, and
the Jura Federations of the International continued to exist and to
meet as usual, for the next five or six years, in annual international
congresses.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Jura Federation, at the time when I came to Switzerland, was the
centre and the leading voice of the international federations. Bakúnin
had just died (July 1, 1876), but the federation retained the position
it had taken under his impulse.

The conditions in France, Spain, and Italy were such that only the
maintenance of the revolutionary spirit that had developed amongst the
Internationalist workers previous to the Franco-German war prevented
the governments from taking decisive steps toward crushing the whole
labour movement and inaugurating the reign of White Terror. It is
well known that the re-establishment of a Bourbon monarchy in France
was very near becoming an accomplished fact. Marshal MacMahon was
maintained as president of the republic only in order to prepare for a
monarchist restoration; the very day of the solemn entry of Henry V.
into Paris was settled, and even the harnesses of the horses, adorned
with the pretender’s crown and initials, were ready. And it is also
known that it was only the fact that Gambetta and Clémenceau--the
opportunist and the radical--had covered wide portions of France with
committees, armed and ready to rise as soon as the _coup d’état_
should be made, which prevented the proposed restoration. But the real
strength of those committees was in the workers, many of whom had
formerly belonged to the International and had retained the old spirit.
Speaking from personal knowledge, I may venture to say that the radical
middle-class leaders would have hesitated in case of an emergency,
while the workers would have seized the first opportunity for an
uprising which, beginning with the defence of the republic, might have
gone further on in the socialist direction.

The same was true in Spain. As soon as the clerical and aristocratic
surroundings of the king drove him to turn the screws of reaction,
the republicans menaced him with a movement in which, they knew,
the real fighting element would be the workers. In Catalonia alone
there were over one hundred thousand men in strongly organized trade
unions, and more than eighty thousand Spaniards belonged to the
International, regularly holding congresses, and punctually paying
their contributions to the association with a truly Spanish sense
of duty. I can speak of these organizations from personal knowledge,
gained on the spot, and I know that they were ready to proclaim the
United States of Spain, abandon ruling the colonies, and in some of
the most advanced regions make serious attempts in the direction of
collectivism. It was this permanent menace which prevented the Spanish
monarchy from suppressing all the workers’ and peasants’ organizations,
and from inaugurating a frank clerical reaction.

Similar conditions prevailed also in Italy. The trade unions in North
Italy had not reached the strength they have now; but parts of Italy
were honeycombed with International sections and republican groups.
The monarchy was kept under continual menace of being upset should the
middle-class republicans appeal to the revolutionary elements among the
workers.

In short, looking back upon these years, from which we are separated
now by a quarter of a century, I am firmly persuaded that if Europe
did not pass through a period of stern reaction after 1871, this was
mainly due to the spirit which was aroused in Western Europe before
the Franco-German war, and has been maintained since by the Anarchist
Internationalists, the Blanquists, the Mazzinians, and the Spanish
‘cantonalist’ republicans.

Of course, the Marxists, absorbed by their local electoral
struggles, knew little of these conditions. Anxious not to draw the
thunderbolts of Bismarck upon their heads, and fearing above all that
a revolutionary spirit might make its appearance in Germany and lead
to repressions which they were not strong enough to face, they not
only repudiated, for tactical purposes, all sympathy with the Western
revolutionists, but gradually became inspired with hatred toward the
revolutionary spirit, and denounced it with virulence wheresoever it
made its appearance, even when they saw its first signs in Russia.

No revolutionary papers could be printed in France at that time,
under Marshal MacMahon. Even the singing of the ‘Marseillaise’ was
considered a crime; and I was once very much amazed at the terror
which seized several of my co-passengers in a train when they heard
a few recruits singing the revolutionary song (in May 1878). ‘Is it
permitted again to sing the “Marseillaise”?’ they asked one another
with anxiety. The French Press had consequently no socialist papers.
The Spanish papers were very well edited, and some of the manifestoes
of their congresses were admirable expositions of anarchist socialism;
but who knows anything of Spanish ideas outside of Spain? As to the
Italian papers, they were all short-lived, appearing, disappearing, and
re-appearing elsewhere under different names; and admirable as some of
them were, they did not spread beyond Italy. Consequently, the Jura
Federation, with its papers printed in French, became the centre for
the maintenance and expression in the Latin countries of the spirit
which--I repeat it--saved Europe from a very dark period of reaction.
And it was also the ground upon which the theoretical conceptions of
anarchism were worked out by Bakúnin and his followers in a language
that was understood all over continental Europe.

III

Quite a number of remarkable men of different nationalities, nearly all
of whom had been personal friends of Bakúnin, belonged at that time
to the Jura Federation. The editor of our chief paper, the ‘Bulletin’
of the federation, was James Guillaume, a teacher by profession, who
belonged to one of the aristocratic families of Neuchâtel. Small, thin,
with the stiff appearance and resoluteness of Robespierre, and with a
truly golden heart which opened only in the intimacy of friendship,
he was a born leader by his phenomenal powers of work and his stern
activity. For eight years he fought against all sorts of obstacles to
maintain the paper in existence, taking the most active part in every
detail of the federation, till he had to leave Switzerland, where he
could find no work whatever, and settled in France, where his name will
be quoted some day with the utmost respect in the history of education.

Adhémar Schwitzguébel, also a Swiss, was the type of the jovial,
lively, clear-sighted French-speaking watchmakers of the Bernese
Jura hills. A watch engraver by trade, he never attempted to abandon
his position of manual worker, and, always merry and active, he
supported his large family through the severest periods of slack trade
and curtailed earnings. His gift of taking a difficult economic or
political question, and, after much thought about it, considering it
from the working-man’s point of view, without divesting it of its
deepest meaning, was wonderful. He was known far and wide in the
‘mountains,’ and with the workers of all countries he was a general
favourite.

His direct counterpart was another Swiss, also a watchmaker, Spichiger.
He was a philosopher, slow in both movement and thought, English in
his physical aspect; always trying to get at the full meaning of every
fact, and impressing all of us by the justness of the conclusions he
reached while he was pondering over all sorts of subjects during his
work of scooping out watch lids.

Round these three gathered a number of solid, staunch, middle-aged or
elderly workmen, passionate lovers of liberty, happy to take part in
such a promising movement, and a hundred or so bright young men, also
mostly watchmakers--all very independent and affectionate, very lively,
and ready to go to any length in self-sacrifice.

Several refugees of the Paris Commune had joined the federation. Elisée
Reclus, the great geographer, was of their number--a type of the
true Puritan in his manner of life, and of the French encyclopædist
philosopher of the last century in his mind; the man who inspires
others, but never has governed anyone, and never will do so; the
anarchist whose anarchism is the epitome of his broad, intimate
knowledge of the forms of life of mankind under all climates and in
all stages of civilization; whose books rank among the very best of
the century; whose style, of a striking beauty, moves the mind and the
conscience; and who, as he enters the office of an anarchist paper,
says to the editor--maybe a boy in comparison with himself: ‘Tell me
what I have to do,’ and will sit down, like a newspaper subordinate,
to fill up a gap of so many lines in the current number of the paper.
In the Paris Commune he simply took a rifle and stood in the ranks;
and if he invites a contributor to work with him upon a volume of his
world-famed Geography, and the contributor timidly asks, ‘What have I
to do?’ he replies: ‘Here are the books, here is a table. Do as you
like.’

At his side was Lefrançais, an elderly man, formerly a teacher, who had
been thrice in his life an exile: after June 1848, after Napoleon’s
_coup d’état_, and after 1871. An ex-member of the Commune, and
consequently one of those who were said to have left Paris carrying
away millions in their pockets, he worked as a freight handler at the
railway at Lausanne, and was nearly killed in that work, which required
younger shoulders than his. His book on the Paris Commune is the one
in which the real historical meaning of that movement was put in its
proper light. ‘A Communalist, not an Anarchist, please,’ he would say.
‘I cannot work with such fools as you are;’ and he worked with none but
us, ‘because,’ as he said, ‘you fools are still the men whom I love
best. With you one can work, and remain one’s self.’

Another ex-member of the Paris Commune who was with us was Pindy,
a carpenter from the north of France, an adopted child of Paris.
He became widely known at Paris, during a strike, supported by the
International, for his vigour and bright intelligence, and was elected
a member of the Commune, which nominated him commander of the Tuileries
Palace. When the Versailles troops entered Paris, shooting their
prisoners by the hundred, three men at least were shot in different
parts of the town, having been mistaken for Pindy. After the fight,
however, he was concealed by a brave girl, a seamstress, who saved him
by her calmness when the house was searched by the troops, and who
afterwards became his wife. Only twelve months later they succeeded in
leaving Paris unnoticed, and came to Switzerland. Here Pindy learned
assaying, at which he became skilful; spending his days by the side
of his red-hot stove, and at night devoting himself passionately to
propaganda work, in which he admirably combined the passion of a
revolutionist with the good sense and organizing powers characteristic
of the Parisian worker.

Paul Brousse was then a young doctor, full of mental activity,
uproarious, sharp, lively, ready to develop any idea with a geometrical
logic to its utmost consequences; powerful in his criticisms of the
State and State organization; finding enough time to edit two papers,
in French and in German, to write scores of voluminous letters, to be
the soul of a workmen’s evening party; constantly active in organizing
men, with the subtle mind of a true ‘southerner.’

Among the Italians who collaborated with us in Switzerland, two men
whose names stood always associated, and will be remembered in Italy
by more than one generation, two close personal friends of Bakúnin,
were Cafiero and Malatesta. Cafiero was an idealist of the highest and
the purest type, who gave a considerable fortune to the cause, and
who never since has asked himself what he shall live upon to-morrow;
a thinker plunged in philosophical speculation; a man who never would
harm anyone, and yet took the rifle and marched in the mountains of
Benevento, when he and his friends thought that an uprising of a
socialist character might be attempted, were it only to show the people
that their uprisings ought to have a deeper meaning than that of a mere
revolt against tax collectors. Malatesta was a student of medicine,
who had left the medical profession and also his fortune for the sake
of the revolution; full of fire and intelligence, a pure idealist, who
all his life--and he is now approaching the age of fifty--has never
thought whether he would have a piece of bread for his supper and a
bed for the night. Without even so much as a room that he could call
his own, he would sell sherbet in the streets of London to get his
living, and in the evening write brilliant articles for the Italian
papers. Imprisoned in France, released, expelled, recondemned in Italy,
confined to an island, escaped, and again in Italy in disguise; always
in the hottest of the struggle, whether it be in Italy or elsewhere--he
has persevered in this life for thirty years in succession. And when we
meet him again, released from a prison or escaped from an island, we
find him just as we saw him last; always renewing the struggle, with
the same love of men, the same absence of hatred toward his adversaries
and jailers, the same hearty smile for a friend, the same caress for a
child.

The Russians were few among us, most of them following the German
social democrats. We had, however, Joukóvsky, a friend of Hérzen, who
had left Russia in 1863--a brilliant, elegant, highly intelligent
nobleman, a favourite with the workers--who better than any of the
rest of us had what the French call _l’oreille du peuple_ (the ear of
the workers), because he knew how to fire them by showing them the
great part they had to play in rebuilding society, to lift them by
holding before them high historical views, to throw a flash of light
on the most intricate economic problem, and to electrify them with his
earnestness and sincerity. Sokolóff, formerly an officer of the Russian
general staff, an admirer of Paul Louis Courier for his boldness and of
Proudhon for his philosophical ideas, who had made many a socialist in
Russia by his review articles, was also with us temporarily.

       *       *       *       *       *

I mention only those who became widely known as writers, or as
delegates to congresses, or in some other way. And yet I ask myself if
I ought not rather to speak of those who never committed their names
to print, but were as important in the life of the federation as any
one of the writers; who fought in the ranks, and were always ready
to join in any enterprise, never asking whether the work would be
grand or small, distinguished or modest--whether it would have great
consequences, or simply result in infinite worry to themselves and
their families.

I ought also to mention the Germans Werner and Rinke, the Spaniard
Albarracin, and many others; but I am afraid that these faint sketches
of mine may not convey to the reader the same feelings of respect and
love with which every one of this little family inspired those who knew
him or her personally.

IV

Of all the towns of Switzerland that I know, La Chaux-de-Fonds is
perhaps the least attractive. It lies on a high plateau entirely
devoid of any vegetation, open to bitterly cold winds in the winter,
when the snow lies as deep as at Moscow, and melts and falls again
as often as at St. Petersburg. But it was important to spread our
ideas in that centre, and to give more life to the local propaganda.
Pindy, Spichiger, Albarracin, the two Blanquists, Ferré and Jeallot,
were there, and from time to time I could pay visits to Guillaume at
Neuchâtel, and to Schwitzguébel in the valley of St. Imier.

A life full of work that I liked began now for me. We held many
meetings, distributing ourselves our announcements in the cafés and the
workshops. Once a week we held our section meetings, at which the most
animated discussions took place, and we went also to preach anarchism
at the gatherings convoked by the political parties. I travelled a good
deal, visiting other sections and helping them.

During that winter we won the sympathy of many, but our regular work
was very much hampered by a crisis in the watch trade. Half the
workers were out of work or only partially employed, so that the
municipality had to open dining rooms to provide cheap meals at cost
price. The co-operative workshop established by the anarchists at La
Chaux-de-Fonds, in which the earnings were divided equally among all
the members, had great difficulty in getting work, in spite of its high
reputation, and Spichiger had to resort several times to wool-combing
for an upholsterer in order to get his living.

We all took part, that year, in a manifestation with the red flag at
Bern. The wave of reaction spread to Switzerland, and the carrying
of the workers’ banner was prohibited by the Bern police in defiance
of the constitution. It was necessary, therefore, to show that at
least here and there the workers would not have their rights trampled
underfoot, and would offer resistance. We all went to Bern on the
anniversary of the Paris Commune, to carry the red flag in the streets,
notwithstanding the prohibition. Of course there was a collision with
the police in which two comrades received sword cuts and two police
officers were rather seriously wounded. But the red flag was carried
safe to the hall, where a most animated meeting was held. I hardly
need say that the so-called leaders were in the ranks, and fought
like all the rest. The trial involved nearly thirty Swiss citizens,
all themselves demanding to be prosecuted, and those who had wounded
the two police officers coming forward spontaneously to say that they
had done it. A great deal of sympathy was won to the cause during
the trial; it was understood that all liberties have to be defended
jealously, in order not to be lost. The sentences were consequently
very light, not exceeding three months’ imprisonment.

However, the Bern Government prohibited the carrying of the red flag
anywhere in the canton; and the Jura Federation thereupon decided to
carry it, in defiance of the prohibition, in St. Imier, where we held
our congress that year. This time most of us were armed, and ready to
defend our banner to the last extremity. A body of police had been
placed in a square to stop our column; a detachment of the militia was
kept in readiness in an adjoining field, under the pretext of target
practice--we distinctly heard their shots as we marched through the
town. But when our column appeared in the square, and it was judged
from its aspect that aggression would result in serious bloodshed,
the mayor let us continue our march undisturbed to the hall where the
meeting was to be held. None of us desired a fight; but the strain of
that march in fighting order, to the sound of a military band, was such
that I do not know what feeling prevailed in most of us during the
first moments after we reached the hall--relief at having been spared
an undesired fight, or regret that the fight did not take place. Man is
a very complex being.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our main activity, however, was in working out the practical and
theoretical aspects of anarchist socialism, and in this direction the
federation has undoubtedly accomplished something that will last.

We saw that a new form of society is germinating in the civilized
nations, and must take the place of the old one: a society of equals,
who will not be compelled to sell their hands and brains to those who
choose to employ them in a haphazard way, but who will be able to
apply their knowledge and capacities to production, in an organism so
constructed as to combine all the efforts for procuring the greatest
sum possible of well-being for all, while full, free scope will be
left for every individual initiative. This society will be composed
of a multitude of associations, federated for all the purposes
which require federation: trade federations for production of all
sorts--agricultural, industrial, intellectual, artistic; communes
for consumption, making provision for dwellings, gas works, supplies
of food, sanitary arrangements, etc.; federations of communes among
themselves, and federations of communes with trade organizations; and
finally, wider groups covering the country, or several countries,
composed of men who collaborate for the satisfaction of such economic,
intellectual, artistic, and moral needs as are not limited to a given
territory. All these will combine directly, by means of free agreements
between them, just as the railway companies or the postal departments
of different countries co-operate now, without having a central railway
or postal government, even though the former are actuated by merely
egoistic aims and the latter belong to different and often hostile
States; or as the meteorologists, the Alpine clubs, the lifeboat
stations in Great Britain, the cyclists, the teachers, and so on,
combine for all sorts of work in common, for intellectual pursuits, or
simply for pleasure. There will be full freedom for the development
of new forms of production, invention, and organization; individual
initiative will be encouraged, and the tendency toward uniformity and
centralization will be discouraged.

Moreover, this society will not be crystallized into certain
unchangeable forms, but will continually modify its aspect, because it
will be a living, evolving organism; no need of government will be
felt, because free agreement and federation can take its place in all
those functions which governments consider as theirs at the present
time, and because, the causes of conflict being reduced in number,
those conflicts which may still arise can be submitted to arbitration.

None of us minimized the importance and depth of the change which we
looked for. We understood that the current opinions upon the necessity
of private ownership in land, factories, mines, dwelling houses, and so
on, as a means of securing industrial progress, and of the wage-system
as a means of compelling men to work, would not soon give way to higher
conceptions of socialized ownership and production. We knew that a
tedious propaganda and a long succession of struggles, individual and
collective revolts against the now prevailing forms of property, of
individual self-sacrifice, of partial attempts at reconstruction and
partial revolutions would have to be lived through, before the current
ideas upon private ownership would be modified. And we understood also
that the now current ideas concerning the necessity of authority--in
which all of us have been bred--would not and could not be abandoned
by civilized mankind all at once. Long years of propaganda and a long
succession of partial acts of revolt against authority, as well as a
complete revision of the teachings now derived from history, would
be required before men could perceive that they had been mistaken in
attributing to their rulers and their laws what was derived in reality
from their own sociable feelings and habits. We knew all that. But we
also knew that in preaching change in both these directions we should
be working with the tide of human progress.

When I made a closer acquaintance with the working population and their
sympathizers from the better educated classes, I soon realized that
they valued their personal freedom even more than they valued their
personal well-being. Fifty years ago the workers were ready to sell
their personal liberty to all sorts of rulers, and even to a Cæsar,
in exchange for a promise of material well-being, but now this was no
longer the case. I saw that the blind faith in elected rulers, even if
they were taken from amongst the best leaders of the labour movement,
was dying away amongst the Latin workers. ‘We must know first what we
want, and then we can do it best ourselves,’ was an idea which I found
widely spread among them--far more widely than is generally believed.
The sentence which was put in the statutes of the International
Association: ‘The emancipation of the workers must be accomplished by
the workers themselves,’ had met with general sympathy and had taken
root in minds. The sad experience of the Paris Commune only confirmed
it.

When the insurrection broke out, considerable numbers of men belonging
to the middle classes themselves were prepared to make, or at least
to accept, a new start in the social direction. ‘When my brother and
myself, coming out of our little room, went out in the streets,’
Elisée Reclus said to me once, ‘we were asked on all sides by people
belonging to the wealthier classes: “Tell us what is to be done? We are
ready to try a new start;” but _we_ were not prepared yet to make the
suggestions.’

Never before had a government been as fairly representative of all the
advanced parties as the Council of the Commune, elected on March 25,

