TITLE: The Direct Action Of Environment And Evolution
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: NA
SOURCE_ID: al_petr_kropotkin_the_direct_action_of_environment_and_evolution
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/The_Direct_Action_Of_Environment_And_Evolution.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-direct-action-of-environment-and-evolution.muse
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:55:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

## III

That changes produced in plants and animals by the direct action of a changing environment are inherited, was not a matter of doubt for Darwin. He had carefully studied and sifted the experience of breeders and cultivators, and he found in it ample proofs of such an inheritance. He was aware, of course, that mutilations are not, and cannot be, inherited as such (this had been known, in fact, since the eighteenth century); [This fact was actually recorded by Galen, the ancient Greek physician, c. 200 AD. -- A.C.] but he also knew that characters developed in a new environment were transmitted to the offspring — if the modifying cause had acted upon a certain number of generations. This last limitation was well known to both Lamarck and Darwin and repeatedly mentioned by them.

Having already discussed in a previous article the teachings of Weismann who opposed this view, I shall refer the reader to that article,[10] and only mention here and further develop one or two of its points.

Going back to an early and not generally known work of Weismann, Upon the Final Causes of Transmutations,[11] I found that the origin of his teachings was not experimental: it was theological. In 1876 Weismann was still a Darwinist. His own experiments on seasonal dimorphism had confirmed the facts discovered by Dorfmeister concerning the effects of temperature in producing two different races of butterflies; while the experiments that Weismann made subsequently on mice to prove the non-transmission of a mutilation (the clipped tail) added absolutely nothing to our previous knowledge. If Weismann had taken the trouble of consulting Darwin’s Variation before he had written his eighth essay, he would have seen that clipped tails are not inherited, and he would have learned why such mutilations have little chance of being inherited (embryonal regeneration), and why their non-transmission did not affect Darwin’s views upon the inheritance of variations.

It was under the influence of Schopenhauer’s, Hartmann’s, and Karl Baer’s criticisms of the philosophical substance of Darwinism that Weismann accepted the idea of Baer that evolution without a teleological guidance from above was an unscientific conception. He thus came to the conclusion that, although evolution is a mechanical process, it must have been predetermined by a supreme power in accordance with a certain plan. And, in order ‘to reconcile teleology with mechanism,’ he borrowed from Näeli and partly from Nussbau the idea of ‘continuity’ of the germ-plasm; and thus he came to a Hegelian conception of an ‘immortal soul.’ His hypothesis was thus suggested by those same considerations, lying outside the domain of Science, that Darwin had had to combat.

In his Essays upon Heredity, written in 1881–1887, Weismann represented his germ-plasm hypothesis as an outcome of the remarkable microscopical discoveries made in those years by a number of well-known anatomists, concerning the processes taking place during and immediately after the fertilisation of the egg. But as early as 1897 Professor Hartog made the quite correct remark that the cardinal defect of the theory of Weismann was its ‘objective baselessness.’

It professes [he wrote] to be founded on the microscopic study of the changes in the nucleus in cell-division, but there we find nothing to justify the assumption of two modes of nuclear division in the embryo — the one dividing the determinants, and the other only distributing them between the daughter-cells.[12]

Later on, two of the leading microscopists who took part in the just-mentioned discoveries, far from giving support to Weismann’s contention that no material influences can be transmitted from the protoplasm of a cell to the germ-plam of its nucleas, distinctly contradicted it.[13]

More than that. The fundamental point of all the hypotheses brought forward by Weismann was the isolation of the germ-plasm and the impossibility of its being influenced by the changes going on in the body under the influence of the outer agencies. But the more we advanced in the study of heredity the more we were brought to realize the close interdependence of all the organs and tissues of the living beings — plants and animals alike — and the impossibility of one of their organs being affected without a disturbance being produced in all parts of the organism.[14] We learned from the best embryologists that the living substance which is bearer of inheritance is not localised in the nucleus of the germ-cells; [This statement appears to be incorrect. -- A.C.] and that an intercourse of substances between the nucleus and the cell-plasm must be taken as proved.[15] Finally, we have no experiments tending to prove that even unimportant lesions of the body may be followed by important modifications in the reproductive cells.[16]

The difficulties which the hypothesis too hastily framed by Weismann had to contend with when it was confronted with the scientific observation of Nature, and the new hypotheses he brought forward to meet the rapidly accumulated contradictory facts, were discussed in my above-mentioned article. Sufficient to say here that, after having emphatically denied at the outset that his ‘immortal’ germ-plasm could be influenced by external agencies in the same direction as that taken by the somatogenic changes [in the body] which follow the same causes’[17] ; and after having maintained that the mixture of two germ-plasms in sexual reproduction [that is, Amphimixis] was ‘the only way’ that hereditary influences ‘could arise and persist,[18] Weismann soon had to abandon his Amphimixis hypothesis (already repudiated long since by Darwin). Gradually he came to the hypotheses of ‘Germinal Selection,’ or struggle for food between the determinants of the germ-plasm, as a probable cause of inherited modifications, and ‘Parallel Induction.’ In these two hypotheses he thus acknowledged that the germ-cells are modified by external causes, so as to reproduce in the offspring the somatic, or body changes produced in the parent by the environment. Only in his second hypothesis he suggested that the germ-cells are influenced directly by the external agencies — not through the modifications produced by the environment in the organs and tissues of the body. It hardly need be said that most biologists received this last suggestion, not as a new working hypothesis, but as a veiled concession of Weismann to his opponents. In fact, the hypothesis was not a generalisation born from the study of changes going on in germ-cells under the action of external agencies: it was advocated only as an hypothetical explanation for the facts that contradicted the previous hypotheses of Weismann. But till now — we are told by the specialists who have studied the subject — it is impossible to ascertain in one single concrete case of inheritance how the modification was produced in the germ-cells: through the body-cells, or independently of them.[19]

Some biologists saw in ‘parallel induction’ an interesting new line of research, and they followed it. But Darwin, who already knew this hypothesis long before Weismann resorted to it, pointed out with full right, in Variation, that although a simultaneous modification in some definite direction of the body-cells and the germ-cells takes place in certain special cases, this cannot be a general cause of the hereditary transmission of variations. Like Amphimixis, this hypothesis does not account for the inherited adaptive variations, the necessity of which for the evolution of new species Darwin already saw in 1868, and we still better see now.

In short, Weismann’s attempt to combine the pre-Darwinian conception of innate pre-determined variations with the Darwinian principle of Natural Selection has failed; and an attentive reader of his last work, Vorträe zur Descendenztheorie  [Lectures on the Theory of Descent] [Note: Darwin did not write in German, Kropotkin must be referring to a German translation. -- A.C.] (especially the pages 258–315 of the second volume), will himself see how little there remained from that attempt. By his criticisms of some facts which formerly used to be quoted as proofs of the inheritance of acquired characters, he certainly induced biologists to go deeper into the subject of heredity. But that was all. In his attempts at constructive work he failed. He had not that power of inductive generalisation which leads modern science to its great discoveries. His hypotheses were brilliantly and imaginatively developed suggestions; but they were not brilliant inductive generalizations. They even lacked originality.

