TITLE: The Direct Action Of Environment And Evolution
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: NA
SOURCE_ID: al_petr_kropotkin_the_direct_action_of_environment_and_evolution
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/The_Direct_Action_Of_Environment_And_Evolution.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-direct-action-of-environment-and-evolution.muse
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:55:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

## IV

However, it may be asked: "Why don’t we know more cases where the hereditary transmission of acquired characters has been proved by experiment? Why have we not yet proofs of acquired characters being retained for a number of generations, even though the offspring was taken back to its old environment?" These two questions certainly deserve a careful examination. [More accurately, the theory deserves a careful throwing-out. -- A.C.]

The reasons are many. To begin with, it is extremely difficult to breed plants, and still more so higher animals, in surroundings sufficiently different from the normal ones for altering the distinctive characters of a species. Especially is it difficult to make animals reproduce themselves in such conditions. In the best-conducted experiments it happened over and over again that the second generation, when it was bred in an unusual environment, perished entirely; in the best cases only one or two individuals survived.

Besides, it was only gradually learned by the experimentators in order to obtain an inheritable variation, the modifying cause must act at a certain period fo the individual’s life, when its reproductive cells are specially sensitive to new impressions.[20] And then the experiments require time. While it is very difficult to breed several generations in succession in unusual conditions, it is precisely several, or even many, generations which must be under the influence of a modifying cause in order to produce a more or less stable variation. Lamarck, in stating his two laws of variation, was careful to indicate that the changes must be slow, and that they must take place for a succession of generations, in order to be inherited and maintained later on for some time. Darwin repeatedly insisted upon this. But only now the conditions under which such experiments must be conducted are beginning to be realized in special climateric stations and laboratories. Up till quite lately such experiments were not in favour in most of the West-European universities.

Finally, during the first decades after the appearance of the Origin of Species, research was chiefly directed, as we have seen, to prove the very fact of a great variability of the species, even in their typical specific characters — this being denied then by a great number of zoologists and botanists. And later on a mass of experiments had to be made in order to prove that if plants and animals be placed in such conditions of temperature, moisture, light, and so on, as are offered in different regions of the Earth, they will display exactly those variations which are characteristic for the floras and faunas of these regions, without any interference of natural or artificial selection. Besides, it was important to prove, and it was proved, that these variations, representing in most cases adaptations to the new conditions of life, could be produced by the new conditions themselves, which stimulate certain physiological functions (nutrition, evaporation, the elaboration of fats, and so on), and through them modify different organs.[21]

Only after this immense work had been done — and it took more than forty years — did biologists begin to investigate how far such variation is capable of giving origin to new races, and how many generations must be submitted to the modifying influences in order to produce a more or less stable variety.[22]

It must also be noted that at the outset, inheritance experiments were chiefly made with variations in the colours and the markings of insects, and only now are they beginning to be directed towards the far more important study of variations in physiological functions, which are (as was indicated long since by G. Lewes and Dohrn, and lately by Plate) the chief agencies in the evolution of new races.

These are the causes which explain why the inheritance of environment-variations has not yet been proved by more experiments. However, it must not be forgotten that we know already two important groups of variations, both due to environment, which are inherited, and the inheritance of variations by means of bud-reproduction, and the other includes the so-called ‘sports,’ described by de Vries as ‘mutations.’

With regard to the former, I have already mentioned in a previous article[23] that Darwin, who had studied the subject, had shown that there is no means of finding any substantial distinction between reproduction by seed. The laws of both are the same, and in both cases the reproduction takes place by means of germ-cells, capable of reproducing the whole plant with its sexual organs and with sexual reproduction, whether the germ-plasm be contained in a seed or a bud, in the leaf of a Begonia, or in the cambial tissue of a Willow. And I have also shown that if Weismann, writing in 1888 under the fascination of his Amphimixis hypothesis, made the grave mistake of thinking that there is no transmission of germ-plasm in vegetative reproduction, and therefore described ‘bud-variation’ as an ‘individual variation,’ he at least saw his error later on. He recognised in 1904,[24] using almost the same words as Darwin used in ‘Variation,’ that a plant obtained through budding is as much a new individual as if it had been reproduced by seed.[25]

But it must be remembered that in the vegetable world reproduction by buds (rootstocks, runners, and the like) is far more important than reproduction by seed. In fact it seems most probable that the immense majority of the plants which cover the northern part of the northern hemisphere have reproduced themselves since the Glacial period chiefly by buds, runners, rootstocks and the like, as the Artic and many Alpine plants still reproduce themselves. And as they transmitted to their offspring, during this long period of a chiefly vegetative reproduction, the characters they acquired in new surroundings, as they followed the retreat of the ice-sheet, we can already say that an enormous number of sub-Artic and Temperate zone varieties and species owe their origin to the inherited effects of the direct action of changing surroundings.

It is very nice to say in poetical language that the Steppes of South Russia are covered now with the same individuals of Grasses that were withering under the hoofs of the horses during the migration of the Ugrians from the Southern Urals to Hungary; but a botanist who knows that a bud on the rootstock of a Grass contains the very same germ-plasm as the seed in its ear does not take these pretty images for a scientific induction.

