TITLE: The Direct Action Of Environment And Evolution
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: NA
SOURCE_ID: al_petr_kropotkin_the_direct_action_of_environment_and_evolution
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/The_Direct_Action_Of_Environment_And_Evolution.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-direct-action-of-environment-and-evolution.muse
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:55:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

## V

Much of the same must be said about the so-called ‘sports,’ or inherited variations which seem to appear all of a sudden and have often given to breeders and growers the possibility of raising new varieties, or sub-species. Darwin paid them a good deal of attention; and in 1900, when the well-known Dutch botanist de Vries described the ‘sports’ under the name of ‘mutations,’ and saw in them the real cue to the origin of species, interest in these ‘sudden’ or ‘discontinuous’ variations was renewed.

Already in Darwin’s times it had been suggested that the ‘sports’ may represent an important factor in the evolution of new species, and Darwin had shown the reason why this could not be the case (it will be mentioned further on). However, developed as it was by de Vries in a well-written work, rich in original observations, ‘the Mutations Theory’ obtained for some time some success. The main objection against considering Natural Selection as Nature’s means of evolving new species being the insignificance of the first incipient changes in ‘continuous’ variation, and their little value in the struggle for life, some biologists saw in the sudden variations, or ‘mutations,’ the means of getting rid of this objection, without resorting to the hateful Direct Action of Environment.

De Vries based his theory chiefly on the sports of a well-known decorative plant, the Evening Primrose, or Oenothera lamarckiana, which he found growing wild in a field at Hilversum, near Amsterdam. It displayed there a number of ‘sports,’ and by cultivating these sports de Vries obtained a number of new ‘species.’[26] These observations led him to build up a new theory of descent. According to it, the variations which Darwin described as ‘continuous,’ or ‘fluctuating,’ have no value for the appearance of new species — not only because they are too small for having a life-value in the struggle for existence, but also because they are not inherited, and consequently cannot be ‘cumulative.’ The sudden ‘discontinuous’ variations (Darwin’s ‘sports’) are known, on the contrary, to be inherited, and they often offer sufficient differences from the normal type to be of value for Natural Selection. In artificial selection they have been the means of obtaining new steady varieties.

In his earlier researches de Vries, who had studied for fifteen years such inherited ‘monstrosities’ as the Five-Leaved Clover, and the Many-Headed Poppy, had come, in accordance with Professor J. MacLeod, to the conclusion that rich nutrition in the wide sense of the word (heavy manuring, keeping the seedlings wide apart, and so on) was the first condition for obtaining such inheritable variations.[27] But later on, accepting the teachings of Weismann, he separated the ‘nutrition variations’ — which, he maintained, were not inheritable — from the ‘mutations.’ The latter were inherited, because they were originated by ‘congenital’ variations, suddenly appearing for some causes unknown in the germ-plasm, at certain periods of the life of species. Each species, he said, has such a period, during which it can give origin to new species.

However, it was soon recognised by most botanists that the value of the Oenothera sports for a theory of descent had been over-estimated. From accurate researches made in the United States, at Harlem, and in the environs of Liverpool, it appeared that the species described as Oenothera lamarckiana had a long history: it was cultivated in Europe as early as the middle of the eighteenth century; and it easily could be a crossing of two other species of the Evening Primrose. Hence its great variability.[28] Moreover — and this is an essential point, already noticed by Darwin — a variation is often described as a ‘sudden’ one simply because the minute changes which were leading to its appearance were not taken notice of. In reality, leaving aside those unimportant individual differences which but feebly affect some organs, Darwin found no substantial difference between the sports and the inheritable fluctuating variations due to environment.[29] As to the idea that sports might explain the appearance of new species, Darwin very wisely pointed out that purely accidental sports could not have played such a part in the evolution of new species, because they would not offer that accommodation to the environment which can only be supplied by a definite and cumulative variation under the influence of a new environment,—this variation being aided by Natural Selection. [Given billions of years, yes, such random mutations are indeed capable of explaining genetics as it has developed in the species. -- A.C.]

At any rate, those who have seriously studied the whole subject of evolution and heredity, like Yves Delage, Johannsen, Plate, and many others, do not now attribute to ‘mutations’ the importance that was going to be attributed to ‘mutations’ the importance that was going to be attributed to them a few years ago.[30] Professor Edmond Bordage, who has published lately a special study of the whole question of mutations, also came to a similar conclusion.[31]

To begin with, Bordage points out that the Oenothea lamarckiana is, according to different botanical authorities, a hybrid, either between Oe. Grandiflora and Oe. biennis, both imported to Europe in the eighteenth century (the former was known at Harlem since 1756), or between different varieties of Oe. biennis, which is a very variable species.[32] But even if it was not a hybrid, the Evening Primrose has undergone so many changes in the conditions of its culture during the last hundred or hundred and fifty years, that its present considerable variability may be a consequence of these changes.

All taken, Professor Bordage comes to the opinion that a mutation of not something substantially different from an ordinary variation. It is only

a sudden external expression of internal processes, accomplished gradually and without interruption ... Between the sudden and the slow variation there is no absolute difference. Both can be considered as the effects of the same law, manifesting themselves more or less rapidly.

