TITLE: The Direct Action Of Environment And Evolution
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: NA
SOURCE_ID: al_petr_kropotkin_the_direct_action_of_environment_and_evolution
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/The_Direct_Action_Of_Environment_And_Evolution.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-direct-action-of-environment-and-evolution.muse
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:55:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

## I

When Darwin was leaving England for a cruise in the Beagle he was warned by one of his friends that he must not let himself be influenced by what he might see in Nature in favour of the variability of the species. ‘None of these French theories,’ he was told (I quote from memory), which meant: ‘Nothing of the ideas of Buffon, Lamarck, and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, according to whom the direct action of the ever-changing conditions of life originated the infinite variety of vegetable and animal forms peopling the globe.’

Darwin carefully observed Nature and studied its life, and he felt the spell of ‘the French ideas.’ And both in 1842, when he wrote a first sketch of his conceptions about evolution,[5] and in 1859, when he published his Origin of Species, where he insisted upon the dominating part played in the evolution of new forms by Natural Selection, he indicated at the same time the part that is played by the Buffon-Lamarckian factor — the Direct Action of Environment. Lyell even reproached him with the ‘Lamarckism’ of the Origin of Species. However, at that time Darwin postponed a thorough discussion of the subject to a work on Variation, for which he was collecting materials. Only nine years later he published the first part of this work; but in the meantime, already in the third edition of the Origin of Species, he felt bound to introduce important matter dealing with the direct action of environment. His great work on Variation, as well as the sixth edition of Origin of Species, contained, in fact, a straightforward recognition of the importance of the environment-factor in the evolution of new species. He did not hesitate to admit that in certain cases ‘definite’ and ‘cumulative’ variation under the influence of environment could be so effective for originating new varieties and species adapted to the new environment, that the role of Natural Selection would be quite secondary in these cases.

The reasons for such a modification of opinion were acknowledged by Darwin himself. In the ‘fifties there were no works dealing on a scientific basis with variation in Nature; while Experimental Morphology, although it had been recommended already by Bacon,[6] was called into existence after the appearance of Darwin’s work. Still, the new data, rapidly accumulated in these two branches of research after 1859, were such as to convince Darwin of the importance of the direct action of environment, and he frankly acknowledged it.

Of course he did not abandon the fundamental conception of his Origin of Species. He continued to maintain that a purely individual, accidental variation could supply Natural Selection with the necessary materials for the evolution of new species. But he also had seriously pondered upon the following question that was raised by his first great work: Granting all that has been said about the importance of the struggle for existence — Would Natural Selection be capable of increasing, or merely accentuation, from generation to generation a new useful feature, if this feature appeared accidentally, in a few individuals only, and was therefore submitted to the law of all accidental changes? Is it not necessary, for obtaining a gradual increase of the new character, that some external cause should be acting in a definite direction for a number of generations upon the majority of the individuals of a given group, and its effects be transmitted more of less from one generation to the next?

The reply that Darwin gave to this question in 1868 in the revised (sixth) edition of his Origin of Species was pretty definitely in the affirmative. He wrote:

It should not, however, be overlooked that certain rather strongly marked variations, which no one would rank as mere individual variations, frequently recur, owing to a similar organisation being similarly acted on — of which fact numerous instances could be given with out domestic production ... There can also be no doubt that the tendency to vary in the same manner has often been so strong that all individuals of the same species have been similarly modified without the aid of any form of selection.[7]

Besides, everyone who will take the trouble (or rather, give himself the pleasure) of re-reading Variation will see that such a thing as an indefinite, haphazard variation, even with the aid of Natural Selection, hardly had any importance for the great founder of the theory of evolution at the time when he wrote this last work.[8] Over and over again he repeated in it that variability depended entirely upon the conditions of life; so that if the latter remained unaltered for several generations, ‘there would be no variability, and consequently no scope for the work of Natural Selection.’ And, on the other hand, where the same variation continually recurs, owing to ‘the action of some strongly predisposing cause,’ the appearance of new varieties is rendered possible, independently of Natural Selection. In chapter xxiii. He gave the facts he was able to collect before 1868, ‘rendering it probable that climate, food, etc., have acted so definitely and powerfully on the organisation of our domestic productions that new sub-varieties or races have been thus formed without the selection of by or Nature.’ It is also evident that if Darwin had had at his disposal the data we have now he would not have limited his conclusions to domesticated plants and animals. He would have been able to extend them to variation in free Nature.

