TITLE: The Direct Action Of Environment And Evolution
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: NA
SOURCE_ID: al_petr_kropotkin_the_direct_action_of_environment_and_evolution
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/The_Direct_Action_Of_Environment_And_Evolution.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-direct-action-of-environment-and-evolution.muse
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:55:25Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

## II

For the first twenty or thirty years after the appearance of the Origin of Species, research was chiefly directed to the study of the direct action of environment as it works in free Nature and is made to work in our experiments. The chief result of these researches was to prove, first, that there are no such specific characters, either in plants or in animals, as could not be altered by modifying their physical conditions of life; and, second, that the variations obtained experimentally under certain conditions of heat or cold, dryness or moisture, rich or poor nutrition, and so on, were exactly those which are characteristic for animals and plants living in the Artic and Torrid zone, in a dry and in a wet climate, in fertile prairies and in deserts. It was thus proved that if a species of plants or animals migrated from a warmer into a cooler region, or from the sea-cost inland, or from a prairieland into a desert, Variation itself amongst the new immigrants, apart from Natural Selection, would tend to create a variety representing an adaptation to the new conditions. The same would happen if the climate of a given locality underwent a change for some physiographical reason. In both cases Natural Selection would thus play a quite subordinate part — that of a ‘handmaid to Variation,’ as Hooker wrote in one of his letters to Darwin. It would have only to weed out the weaklings — those who would not possess the necessary plasticity for undergoing the necessary changes in their tissues, their organs, and (with animals) in their habits.

The researches of those years having shown how the floras and the faunas of the Artic barren lands, the Alpine summits, the African swamps, the sea-casts, the deserts, and the Steppes were adapted to withstand the climate and the general conditions of life in each of these surroundings, the first steps were also made, especially by botanists, to prove that most of these wonderful adaptations could be reproduced in a short time in our experiments. It was sufficient for that to rear the plants or the animals into those conditions of temperature, moisture, light, nourishment, and so on which prevail in the different regions of the earth. Hence, already then — especially for those who were acquainted with Nature itself, it appeared most improbable that the adaptations of plants and animals which we see in Nature should be the results of merely accidental, fortuitous variations.

To take one of the simplest instances — we had learned form experiments that when a plant was grown under a glass bell in a very dry air, its leaves soon ceased to develop succulent lobes, and the ribs of the leaves were turned into spines or prickles. And when we saw that spiny plants were characteristic of the vegetation of dry regions, we could not be persuaded that the unavoidable transformation of leaves into prickles and spines in all plants immigrating into a desert, or growing in a gradually desiccating region, should count for nothing in the evolution of spiny species. We could not believe that all the evolution of the so-called ‘adaptive’ structures in deserts, sea borders, Alpine regions, and so on, which is going on in Nature on an immense scale as a physiological result of the conditions themselves, should leave no trace in the evolution of the desert, sea-border, and Alpine species; that the adjustments which are in the individual a direct consequence of the physico-chemical action of the environment upon its living matter, should have in the evolution of a species a merely accidental origin.

Already then many biologists took the Lamarckian point of view; and very soon Darwin himself, after having gained what he considered to be the main point of his teaching — the variability of species,[9] made the next step. He recognised the powers of the direct action of environment in the evolution of new varieties, and eventually new species. The part of Natural Selection in this case was to eliminate those individuals which were slow in acquiring the new adaptive features, and to keep a certain balance in the evolution of new characters. Its function was thus to give a certain stability to the new variety. Of course this stability did not mean immutability. There being no immutable species, it meant only that the new features would be retained for a certain number of generations, even if the new variety was placed once more in new surroundings, or was returned to the old ones.

