TITLE: Fields, Factories and Workshops
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: 1899
SOURCE_ID: pg_64353
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/64353-0.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/64353
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-03T20:58:30Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION.

Readers who have had the patience to follow the facts accumulated
in this book, especially those who have given them a thoughtful
attention, will probably feel convinced of the immense powers over
the productive forces of Nature that man has acquired within the
last half a century. Comparing the achievements indicated in this
book with the present state of production, some will, I hope, also
ask themselves the question which will be ere long, let us hope,
the main object of a scientific political economy: Are the means
now in use for satisfying human needs, under the present system of
permanent division of functions and production for profits, really
_economical_? Do they really lead to economy in the expenditure of
human forces? Or, are they not mere wasteful survivals from a past
that was plunged into darkness, ignorance and oppression, and never
took into consideration the economical and social value of the human
being?

In the domain of agriculture it may be taken as proved that if a
small part only of the time that is now given in each nation or
region to field culture was given to well thought out and socially
carried out permanent improvements of the soil, the duration of work
which would be required afterwards to grow the yearly bread-food for
an average family of five would be less than a fortnight every year;
and that the work required for that purpose would not be the hard
toil of the ancient slave, but work which would be agreeable to the
physical forces of every healthy man and woman in the country.

It has been proved that by following the methods of intensive
market-gardening--partly under glass--vegetables and fruit can be
grown in such quantities that men could be provided with a rich
vegetable food and a profusion of fruit, if they simply devoted to
the task of growing them the hours which everyone willingly devotes
to work in the open air, after having spent most of his day in the
factory, the mine, or the study. Provided, of course, that the
production of food-stuffs should not be the work of the isolated
individual, but the planned-out and combined action of human groups.

It has also been proved--and those who care to verify it by
themselves may easily do so by calculating the real expenditure for
labour which was lately made in the building of workmen’s houses by
both private persons and municipalities[198]--that under a proper
combination of labour, twenty to twenty-four months of one man’s
work would be sufficient to secure for ever, for a family of five,
an apartment or a house provided with all the comforts which modern
hygiene and taste could require.

And it has been demonstrated by actual experiment that, by adopting
methods of education, advocated long since and partially applied
here and there, it is most easy to convey to children of an average
intelligence, before they have reached the age of fourteen or
fifteen, a broad general comprehension of Nature, as well as of
human societies; to familiarise their minds with sound methods of
both scientific research and technical work, and inspire their
hearts with a deep feeling of human solidarity and justice; and that
it is extremely easy to convey during the next four or five years
a reasoned, scientific knowledge of Nature’s laws, as well as a
knowledge, at once reasoned and practical, of the technical methods
of satisfying man’s material needs. Far from being inferior to the
“specialised” young persons manufactured by our universities, the
_complete_ human being, trained to use his brain and his hands,
excels them, on the contrary, in all respects, especially as an
initiator and an inventor in both science and technics.

All this has been proved. It is an acquisition of the times we
live in--an acquisition which has been won despite the innumerable
obstacles always thrown in the way of every initiative mind. It has
been won by the obscure tillers of the soil, from whose hands greedy
States, landlords and middlemen snatch the fruit of their labour
even before it is ripe; by obscure teachers who only too often fall
crushed under the weight of Church, State, commercial competition,
inertia of mind and prejudice.

And now, in the presence of all these conquests--what is the reality
of things?

Nine-tenths of the whole population of grain-exporting countries
like Russia, one-half of it in countries like France which live on
home-grown food, work upon the land--most of them in the same way
as the slaves of antiquity did, only to obtain a meagre crop from
a soil, and with a machinery which they cannot improve, because
taxation, rent and usury keep them always as near as possible to the
margin of starvation. In this twentieth century, whole populations
still plough with the same plough as their mediæval ancestors, live
in the same incertitude of the morrow, and are as carefully denied
education as their ancestors; and they have, in claiming their
portion of bread, to march with their children and wives against
their own sons’ bayonets, as their grandfathers did hundreds of years
ago.

In industrially developed countries, a couple of months’ work, or
even much less than that, would be sufficient to produce for a family
a rich and varied vegetable and animal food. But the researches of
Engel (at Berlin) and his many followers tell us that the workman’s
family has to spend one full half of its yearly earnings--that is,
to give six months of labour, and often more--to provide its food.
And what food! Is not bread and dripping the staple food of more than
one-half of English children?

One month of work every year would be quite sufficient to provide
the worker with a healthy dwelling. But it is from 25 to 40 per
cent. of his yearly earnings--that is, from three to five months of
his working time every year--that he has to spend in order to get
a dwelling, in most cases unhealthy and far too small; and this
dwelling will never be his own, even though at the age of forty-five
or fifty he is sure to be sent away from the factory, because the
work that he used to do will by that time be accomplished by a
machine and a child.

We all know that the child ought, at least, to be familiarised with
the forces of Nature which some day he will have to utilise; that
he ought to be prepared to keep pace in his life with the steady
progress of science and technics; that he ought to study science and
learn a trade. Everyone will grant thus much; but what do we do? From
the age of ten or even nine we send the child to push a coal-cart in
a mine, or to bind, with a little monkey’s agility, the two ends of
threads broken in a spinning gin. From the age of thirteen we compel
the girl--a child yet--to work as a “woman” at the weaving-loom,
or to stew in the poisoned, over-heated air of a cotton-dressing
factory, or, perhaps, to be poisoned in the death chambers of a
Staffordshire pottery. As to those who have the relatively rare
luck of receiving some more education, we crush their minds by
useless overtime, we consciously deprive them of all possibility of
themselves becoming producers; and under an educational system of
which the motive is “profits,” and the means “specialisation,” we
simply work to death the women teachers who take their educational
duties in earnest. What floods of useless sufferings deluge every
so-called civilised land in the world!

When we look back on ages past, and see there the same sufferings,
we may say that perhaps then they were unavoidable on account of the
ignorance which prevailed. But human genius, stimulated by our modern
Renaissance, has already indicated new paths to follow.

For thousands of years in succession to grow one’s food was the
burden, almost the curse, of mankind. But it need be so no more.
If you make yourselves the soil, and partly the temperature and
the moisture which each crop requires, you will see that to grow
the yearly food of a family, under rational conditions of culture,
requires so little labour that it might almost be done as a mere
change from other pursuits. If you return to the soil, and co-operate
with your neighbours instead of erecting high walls to conceal
yourself from their looks; if you utilise what experiment has already
taught us, and call to your aid science and technical invention,
which never fail to answer to the call--look only at what they have
done for warfare--you will be astonished at the facility with which
you can bring a rich and varied food out of the soil. You will admire
the amount of sound knowledge which your children will acquire by
your side, the rapid growth of their intelligence, and the facility
with which they will grasp the laws of Nature, animate and inanimate.

Have the factory and the workshop at the gates of your fields and
gardens, and work in them. Not those large establishments, of course,
in which huge masses of metals have to be dealt with and which are
better placed at certain spots indicated by Nature, but the countless
variety of workshops and factories which are required to satisfy
the infinite diversity of tastes among civilised men. Not those
factories in which children lose all the appearance of children in
the atmosphere of an industrial hell, but those airy and hygienic,
and consequently economical, factories in which human life is of more
account than machinery and the making of extra profits, of which we
already find a few samples here and there; factories and workshops
into which men, women and children will not be driven by hunger,
but will be attracted by the desire of finding an activity suited
to their tastes, and where, aided by the motor and the machine,
they will choose the branch of activity which best suits their
inclinations.

Let those factories and workshops be erected, not for making profits
by selling shoddy or useless and noxious things to enslaved Africans,
but to satisfy the unsatisfied needs of millions of Europeans. And
again, you will be struck to see with what facility and in how short
a time your needs of dress and of thousands of articles of luxury
can be satisfied, when production is carried on for satisfying real
needs rather than for satisfying shareholders by high profits or for
pouring gold into the pockets of promoters and bogus directors. Very
soon you will yourselves feel interested in that work, and you will
have occasion to admire in your children their eager desire to become
acquainted with Nature and its forces, their inquisitive inquiries as
to the powers of machinery, and their rapidly developing inventive
genius.

Such is the future--already possible, already realisable; such is
the present--already condemned and about to disappear. And what
prevents us from turning our backs to this present and from marching
towards that future, or, at least, making the first steps towards
it, is not the “failure of science,” but first of all our crass
cupidity--the cupidity of the man who killed the hen that was laying
golden eggs--and then our laziness of mind--that mental cowardice so
carefully nurtured in the past.

For centuries science and so-called practical wisdom have said to
man: “It is good to be rich, to be able to satisfy, at least, your
material needs; but the only means to be rich is to so train your
mind and capacities as to be able to compel other men--slaves, serfs
or wage-earners--to make these riches for you. You have no choice.
Either you must stand in the ranks of the peasants and the artisans
who, whatsoever economists and moralists may promise them in the
future, are now periodically doomed to starve after each bad crop
or during their strikes, and to be shot down by their own sons the
moment they lose patience. Or you must train your faculties so as to
be a military commander of the masses, or to be accepted as one of
the wheels of the governing machinery of the State, or to become a
manager of men in commerce or industry.” For many centuries there was
no other choice, and men followed that advice, without finding in it
happiness, either for themselves and their own children, or for those
whom they pretended to preserve from worse misfortunes.

But modern knowledge has another issue to offer to thinking men. It
tells them that in order to be rich they need not take the bread
from the mouths of others; but that the more rational outcome would
be a society in which men, with the work of their own hands and
intelligence, and by the aid of the machinery already invented and
to be invented, should themselves create all imaginable riches.
Technics and science will not be lagging behind if production takes
such a direction. Guided by observation, analysis and experiment,
they will answer all possible demands. They will reduce the time
which is necessary for producing wealth to any desired amount, so as
to leave to everyone as much leisure as he or she may ask for. They
surely cannot guarantee happiness, because happiness depends as much,
or even more, upon the individual himself as upon his surroundings.
But they guarantee, at least, the happiness that can be found in the
full and varied exercise of the different capacities of the human
being, in work that need not be overwork, and in the consciousness
that one is not endeavouring to base his own happiness upon the
misery of others.

These are the horizons which the above inquiry opens to the
unprejudiced mind.

FOOTNOTE:

[198] These figures may be computed, for instance, from the data
contained in “The Ninth Annual Report of the Commissioner of
Labour of the United States, for the year 1893: Building and Loan
Associations.” In this country the cost of a workman’s cottage is
reckoned at about £200, which would represent 700 to 800 days of
labour. But we must not forget how much of this sum is a toll raised
by the capitalists and the landlords upon everything that is used in
building the cottage: the bricks and tiles, the mortar, the wood, the
iron, etc.

APPENDIX.

A.--BRITISH INVESTMENTS ABROAD.

The important question as to the amount of British capital invested
in the colonies and in other countries has only quite lately received
due attention. For the last ten years or so one could find in the
“Reports of the Commissioner of Inland Revenue” a mention of the
revenue derived from British capital invested in foreign loans to
States and Municipalities and in railway companies; but these returns
were still incomplete. Consequently, Mr. George Paish made in 1909
and 1911 an attempt at determining these figures with more accuracy
in two papers which he read before the Statistical Society.[199]

Mr. Paish based his researches on the Income Tax, completing these
data by special researches about private investments, which do not
appear in the Income Tax returns. He has not yet got to the end of
his investigation; but, all taken, he estimates that the yearly
income received by this country from abroad from different sources
reaches £300,000,000 every year.

B.--FRENCH IMPORTS.

About one-tenth part of the cereals consumed in France is still
imported; but, as will be seen in a subsequent chapter, the progress
in agriculture has lately been so rapid that even without Algeria
France will soon have a surplus of cereals. Wine is imported, but
nearly as much is exported. So that coffee and oil-seeds remain
the only food articles of durable importance for import. For coal
and coke France is still tributary to Belgium, to this country,
and to Germany; but it is chiefly the inferiority of organisation
of coal extraction which stands in the way of the home supply. The
other important items of imports are: raw cotton (from £12,440,000
to £18,040,000 in 1903-1910), raw wool (from £15,160,000 to
£23,200,000), and raw silk (from £10,680,000 to £17,640,000), as well
as hides and furs, oil-seeds, and machinery (about £10,000,000).
The exports of manufactured goods were £80,000,000 in 1890, and
in subsequent years from £119,000,000 to £137,000,000. Exports of
textiles, exclusive of yarn and linen, £29,800,000 in 1890, and
£34,440,000 in 1908-1910; while the imports of all textiles are
insignificant (from £5,000,000 to £7,000,000).

C.--GROWTH OF INDUSTRY IN RUSSIA.

The growth of industry in Russia will be best seen from the
following:--

                             1880-81.        1893-94.          1910.
                               Cwts.           Cwts.           Cwts.

  Cast iron                 8,810,000       25,450,000      61,867,000
  Iron                      5,770,000        9,700,000 }    61,540,700
  Steel                     6,030,000        9,610,000 }
  Railway rails             3,960,000        4,400,000      10,408,300
  Coal                     64,770,000      160,000,000     530,570,000
    (Imports of Coal)                  from 80,000,000  to 100,000,000
  Naphtha                   6,900,000      108,700,000     189,267,000
  Sugar                     5,030,000       11,470,000      28,732,000
  Raw cotton, home grown      293,000        1,225,000       3,736,000
  Cottons, grey, and yarn  23,640,000       42,045,000      86,950,000
  Cottons, printed          6,160,000        7,720,000      37,680,000

                       1900.          1908.

  All cottons       £56,156,000    £94,233,000
  All woollens       19,064,000     25,388,000
  Linen               7,076,600      9,969,000
  Silk                3,335,000      3,969,000

The recent growth of the coal and iron industries in South Russia
(with the aid of Belgian capital) was very well illustrated at the
Turin Exhibition of 1911. From less than 100,000 tons in 1860, the
extraction of coal and anthracite rose to 16,840,460 metric tons in

