TITLE: Fields, Factories and Workshops
AUTHOR: Peter Kropotkin
YEAR: 1899
SOURCE_ID: pg_64353
SOURCE_PATH: data/raw/64353-0.txt
SOURCE_URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/64353
RETRIEVED_UTC: 2026-02-04T16:53:48Z
LICENSE_NOTE: Public domain source (see metadata/manifest.csv)
----

M. Toubeau, that replanted wheat could be made a powerful means of
increasing the crops in Western Europe.[203] So far as I know, the
idea has not yet been submitted to a practical test; but when one
thinks of the remarkable results obtained by Hallet’s method of
planting; of what the market-gardeners obtain by replanting once
and even twice; and of how rapidly the work of planting is done by
market-gardeners in Jersey, one must agree that in replanted wheat
we have a new opening worthy of the most careful consideration.
Experiments have not yet been made in this direction; but Prof.
Grandeau, whose opinion I have asked on this subject, wrote to me
that he believes the method must have a great future. Practical
market-gardeners (Paris _maraîcher_) whose opinion I have asked, see,
of course, nothing extravagant in that idea.

With plants yielding 1,000 grains each--and in the Capelle experiment
they yielded an average of 600 grains--the yearly wheat-food of one
individual man (5·65 bushels, or 265 lbs.), which is represented by
from 5,000,000 to 5,500,000 grains, could be grown on a space of
250 square yards; while for an experienced hand replanting would
represent no more than ten to twelve hours’ work. With a proper
machine-tool, the work could probably be very much reduced. In Japan,
two men and two women plant with rice three-quarters of an acre in
one day (Ronna, _Les Irrigations_, vol. iii., 1890, p. 67 seq.). That
means (Fesca, _Japanesische Landwirthschaft_, p. 33) from 33,000 to
66,000 plants, or, let us say, a minimum of 8,250 plants a day for
one person. The Jersey gardeners plant from 600 (inexperienced) to
1,000 plants per hour (experienced).

P.--IMPORTS OF VEGETABLES TO THE UNITED KINGDOM.

That the land in this country is not sufficiently utilised for
market-gardening, and that the largest portion of the vegetables
which are imported from abroad could be grown in this country, has
been said over and over again within the last twenty-five years.

It is certain that considerable improvements have taken place
lately--the area under market-gardens, and especially the area
under glass for the growth of fruit and vegetables, having largely
been increased of late. Thus, instead of 38,957 acres, which were
given to market-gardening in Great Britain in 1875, there were, in
1894, 88,210 acres, exclusive of vegetable crops on farms, given
to that purpose (_The Gardener’s Chronicle_, 20th April, 1895, p.
483). But that increase remains a trifle in comparison with similar
increases in France, Belgium, and the United States. In France, the
area given to market-gardening was estimated in 1892 by M. Baltet
(_L’horticulture dans les cinq parties du monde_, Paris, Hachette,
1895) at 1,075,000 acres--four times more, in proportion to the
cultivable area, than in this country; and the most remarkable of it
is that considerable tracts of land formerly treated as uncultivable
have been reclaimed for the purposes of market-gardening as also of
fruit growing.

As things stand now in this country, we see that very large
quantities of the commonest vegetables, each of which could be grown
in this country, are imported.

Lettuces are imported--not only from the Azores or from the south
of France, but they continue until June to be imported from France,
where they are mostly grown--not in the open air, but in frames.
Early cucumbers, also grown in frames, are largely imported from
Holland, and are sold so cheaply that many English gardeners have
ceased to grow them.[204] Even beetroot and pickling cabbage are
imported from Holland and Brittany (the neighbourhoods of Saint Malo,
where I saw them grown in a sandy soil, which would grow nothing
without a heavy manuring with guano, as a second crop, after a first
one of potatoes); and while onions were formerly largely grown in
this country, we see that, in 1894, 5,288,512 bushels of onions,
£765,049 worth, were imported from Belgium (chief exporter), Germany,
Holland, France, and so on.

Again, that early potatoes should be imported from the Azores and
the south of France is quite natural. It is not so natural, however,
that more than 50,000 tons of potatoes (58,060 tons, £521,141 worth,
on the average during the years 1891-1894) should be imported from
the Channel Islands, because there are hundreds if not thousands
of acres in South Devon, and most probably in other parts of the
south coast too, where early potatoes could be grown equally well.
But besides the 90,000 tons of early potatoes (over £700,000 worth)
which are imported to this country, enormous quantities of late
potatoes are imported from Holland, Germany, and Belgium; so that the
total imports of potatoes reach from 200,000 to 450,000 tons every
year. Moreover, this country imports every year all sorts of green
vegetables, for the sum of at least £4,000,000, and for £5,000,000
all sorts of fruit (apart from exotic fruit); while thousands of
acres lie idle, and the country population is driven to the cities in
search of work, without finding it.

Q.--FRUIT-CULTURE IN BELGIUM.

It appears from the _Annuaire statistique de la belgique_ that, out
of a cultivated area of 6,443,500 acres, the following areas were
given in Belgium, at the time of the last census, to fruit-growing,
market-gardening, and culture under glass: Orchards, 117,600 acres;
market-gardens, 103,460 acres; vineries, 173 acres (increased since);
growing of trees for afforestation, gardens, and orchards, 7,475
acres; potatoes, 456,000 acres. Consequently, Belgium is able to
export every year about £250,000 worth more vegetables, and nearly
£500,000 worth more fruit, than she imports. As to the vineries, the
land of the communes of Hoeylart and Overyssche near Brussels is
almost entirely covered with glass, and the exports of home-grown
grapes attained, in 1910, 6,800 tons, in addition to 34,000 tons of
other home-grown fruit. Besides, nearly 3,000 acres in the environs
of Ghent are covered with horticultural establishments which export
palms, azaleas, rhododendrons, and laurels all over the world,
including Italy and the Argentine.

R.--CULTURE UNDER GLASS IN HOLLAND.

Holland in its turn has introduced gardening in hothouses on a great
scale. Here is a letter which I received in the summer of 1909 from a
friend:--

“Here is a picture-postcard which J. (a professor of botany in
Belgium) has brought from Holland, and which he asks me to send you.
[The postcard represents an immense space covered with frames and
glass lights.] Similar establishments cover many square kilomètres
between Rotterdam and the sea, in the north of Heuve. At the time
when J. was there (June 10) they had cucumbers, quite ripe, and
melons as big as a head in considerable numbers, exported abroad. The
cultures are made to a great extent without heating. The gardeners
sow also radishes, carrots, lettuce, under the same glass. The
different produce comes one after the other. They also cultivate
large quantities of strawberries in frames.

“The glass-frames are transported at will, so as to keep under glass
for several days or weeks the plants sown in any part of the garden.
J. is full of admiration for the knowledge of the gardeners. Instead
of the usual routine, they apply the last progress of science. He was
told that glass is broken very seldom; they have acquired the art of
handling glass-frames with facility and great skill.

“Besides the frames represented on the photograph, the region between
Rotterdam and the sea, which is named Westland, has also countless
glass-houses, where they cultivate, with or without heating, grapes,
peaches, northern cherries, haricot beans, tomatoes, and other fruit
and vegetables. These cultures have reached a very high degree of
perfection. The gardeners take the greatest care to fight various
plant diseases. They also cultivate ordinary fruit--apples, pears,
gooseberries, strawberries, and so on--and vegetables in the open
air. Westland being very much exposed to strong winds, they have
built numerous walls, which break the wind, and serve at the same
time for the culture of fruit upon the walls.

“All the region feels the favourable influence of the agricultural
school of Naaldwijk, which is situated almost in the centre of the
Westland.”

S.--PRICES OBTAINED IN LONDON FOR DESSERT GRAPES CULTIVATED UNDER
GLASS.

_The Fruit and Market-Gardener_ gives every week the prices realised
by horticultural and intensive gardening produce, as well as by
flowers, at the great market of Covent Garden. The prices obtained
for dessert grapes--Colmar and Hamburg--are very instructive. I took
two years--1907-1908--which differ from ordinary years by the winters
having been foggy, which made the garden produce to be somewhat late.

In the first days of January the Colmar grapes arriving from the
Belgian hothouses were still sold at relatively low prices--from
6d. to 10d. the pound. But the prices slowly rose in January and
February; the Hamburg grapes were late that year, and therefore in
the middle of March and later on in April the Colmars fetched from
1s. 6d. to 2s. 6d.

The English grapes, coming from Worthing and so on, are certainly
preferred to those that come from Belgium or the Channel Islands. By
the end of April, 1907, and at the beginning of May, they were even
sold at 2s. and 4s. the pound. The best and largest grapes for the
dinners are evidently fetching fancy prices.

But at last the Hamburg grapes, which were late in 1907 and 1908,
began to arrive from Belgium, the Channel Islands, and England, and
the prices suddenly fell. By the end of May the Belgian Hamburgs
fetched only from 10d. to 1s. 4d. the pound, and the prices were
still falling. In June and July the gardeners could only get from 5d.
to 7d., and during the months of September, October, and November,
1908, the best Guernsey grapes were quoted at 6d. the pound. Very
beautiful ones fetched only 4d. the pound.

It was only in the first days of November that the prices went up to
10d. and 1s. 1d. But already, in the second half of December, the new
crop of Colmars began to pour in from Belgium, and the prices fell to
9d., and even to 6d. per pound about Christmas.

We thus see that, notwithstanding a great demand for the best
hothouse grapes, with big grains and quite fresh cut, these grapes
are sold in the autumn almost at the same prices as grapes grown
under the beautiful sun of the south.

As to the quantities of grapes imported to this country, the figures
are also most instructive. The average for the three years 1905-1907
was 81,700,000 lbs., representing a value of £2,224,500.

T.--THE USE OF ELECTRICITY IN AGRICULTURE.

In the first editions of this book I did not venture to speak about
the improvements that could be obtained in agriculture with the aid
of electricity, or by watering the soil with cultures of certain
useful microbes. I preferred to mention only well-established facts
of intensive culture; but now it would be impossible not to mention
what has been done in these two directions.

More than thirty years ago I mentioned in _Nature_ the increase of
the crops obtained by a Russian landlord who used to place at a
certain height above his experimental field telegraph wires, through
which an electric current was passed. A few years ago, in 1908, Sir
Oliver Lodge gave in the _Daily Chronicle_ of July 15 the results of
similar experiments made in a farm near Evesham by Messrs. Newman and
Bomford, with the aid of Sir Oliver Lodge’s son, Mr. Lionel Lodge.

A series of thin wires was placed above an experimental field at
distances of ten yards from each other. These wires were attached
to telegraph poles, high enough not to stand in the way of the
carts loaded with corn. Another field was cultivated by the side of
the former, in order to ascertain what would be the crops obtained
without the aid of electricity.

The poles, five yards high, were placed far away from each other, so
that the wires were quite loose. Owing to the high tension of the
currents that had to be passed through the wires, the insulators on
the poles were very powerful. The currents were positive and of a
high potential--about 100,000 volts. The escape of electricity under
these conditions was so great that it could be seen in the dark. One
could also feel it on the hair and the face while passing under the
wires.

Nevertheless, the expenditure of electric force was small, Sir Oliver
Lodge writes; because, if the potential was high, the quantity
of consumed energy was, notwithstanding that, very small. It is
known, indeed, that this is also the case with the discharges of
atmospheric electricity, which are terrible in consequence of their
high tension, but do not represent a great loss of energy. An oil
motor of two horse-power was therefore quite sufficient.

The results were very satisfactory. The wheat crop in the electrified
field was, in the years 1906-1907, by 29 to 40 per cent. greater, and
also of better quality, than in the non-electrified field. The straw
was also from four to eight inches longer.

For strawberries the increase of the crop was 35 per cent., and 25
per cent. for beetroot.

As to the inoculation of useful microbes by means of watering the
soil with cultures of nitrifying bacteria, experiments on a great
scale have been made in Prussia upon some peat-bogs. The German
agricultural papers speak of these experiments as having given most
satisfactory results.

Most interesting results have also been obtained in Germany by
heating the soil with a mixture of air and hot steam passed along the
ordinary draining tubes. A society has been formed to propagate this
system, and the photographs of the results published by the Society
in a pamphlet, _Gartenkultur, Bodenheizung, Klimaverbesserung_
(Berlin, 1906), seem to prove that with a soil thus heated the growth
of certain vegetables is accelerated to some extent.

U.--PETTY TRADES IN THE LYONS REGION.

The neighbourhoods of St. Etienne are a great centre for all sorts of
industries, and among them the petty trades occupy still an important
place. Ironworks and coal-mines with their smoking chimneys, noisy
factories, roads blackened with coal, and a poor vegetation give
the country the well-known aspects of a “Black Country.” In certain
towns, such as St. Chamond, one finds numbers of big factories
in which thousands of women are employed in the fabrication of
_passementerie_. But side by side with the great industry the petty
trades also maintain a high development. Thus we have first the
fabrication of silk ribbons, in which no less than 50,000 men and
women were employed in the year 1885. Only 3,000 or 4,000 looms were
located then in the factories; while the remainder--that is, from
1,200 to 1,400 looms--belonged to the workers themselves, both at St.
Etienne and in the surrounding country.[205] As a rule the women and
the girls spin the silk or make the winding off, while the father
with his sons weave the ribbons. I saw these small workshops in the
suburbs of St. Etienne, where complicated ribbons (with interwoven
addresses of the manufacture), as well as ribbons of high artistic
finish, were woven in three to four looms, while in the next room the
wife prepared the dinner and attended to household work.

There was a time when the wages were high in the ribbon trade
(reaching over ten francs a day), and M. Euvert wrote me that
half of the suburban houses of St. Etienne had been built by the
_passementiers_ themselves. But the affairs took a very gloomy aspect
when a crisis broke out in 1884. No orders were forthcoming, and the
ribbon weavers had to live on casual earnings. All their economies
were soon spent. “How many,” M. Euvert wrote, “have been compelled
to sell for a few hundred francs the loom for which they had paid
as many thousand francs.” What an effect this crisis has had on the
trade I could not say, as I have no recent information about this
region. Very probably a great number of the ribbon weavers have
emigrated to St. Etienne, where artistic weaving is continued, while
the cheapest sorts of ribbon must be made in factories.

The manufacture of arms occupies from 5,000 to 6,000 workers, half
of whom are in St. Etienne, and the remainder in the neighbouring
county. All work is done in small workshops, save in the great arm
factory of the State, which sometimes will employ from 10,000 to
15,000 persons, and sometimes only a couple of thousand men.

Another important trade in the same region is the manufacture of
hardware, which is all made in small workshops, in the neighbourhoods
of St. Etienne, Le Chambon, Firminy, Rive de Giers, and St. Bonnet le
Château. The work is pretty regular, but the earnings are low as a
rule. And yet the peasants continue to keep to those trades, as they
cannot go on without some industrial occupation during part of the
year.

The yearly production of silk stuffs in France attained no less
than 7,558,000 kilogrammes in 1881;[206] and most of the 5,000,000
to 6,000,000 kilogrammes of raw silk which were manufactured in
the Lyons region were manufactured by hand.[207] Twenty years
before--that is, about 1865--there were only from 6,000 to 8,000
power-looms, and when we take into account both the prosperous
period of the Lyons silk industry about 1876, and the crisis which
it underwent in 1880-1886, we cannot but wonder about the slowness
of the transformation of the industry. Such is also the opinion of
the President of the Lyons Chamber of Commerce, who wrote me that the
domain of the power-loom is increased every year, “by including new
kinds of stuffs, which formerly were reputed as unfeasible in the
power-looms; but,” he added, “the transformation of small workshops
into factories still goes on so slowly that the total number of
power-looms reaches only from 20,000 to 25,000 out of an aggregate
of from 100,000 to 110,000.” (Since that time it certainly must have
considerably increased.)

The leading features of the Lyons silk industry are the following:--

The preparatory work--winding off, warping and so on--is mostly made
in small workshops, chiefly at Lyons, with only a few workshops of
the kind in the villages. Dyeing and finishing are also made--of
course, in great factories--and it is especially in dyeing, which
occupies 4,000 to 5,000 hands, that the Lyons manufacturers have
attained their highest repute. Not only silks are dyed there, but
also cottons and wools, and not only for France, but also to some
extent for London, Manchester, Vienna, and even Moscow. It is also
in this branch that the best machines have to be mentioned.[208]

As to the weaving, it is made, as we just saw, on from 20,000 to
25,000 power-looms and from 75,000 to 90,000 hand-looms, which partly
are at Lyons (from 15,000 to 18,000 hand-looms in 1885) and chiefly
in the villages. The workshops, where one might formerly find several
_compagnons_ employed by one master, have a tendency to disappear,
the workshops mostly having now but from two to three hand-looms, on
which the father, the mother, and the children are working together.
In each house, in each storey of the Croix Rousse, you find until now
such small workshops. The _fabricant_ gives the general indications
as to the kind of stuff he desires to be woven, and his draughtsmen
design the pattern, but it is the workman himself who must find
the way to weave in threads of all colours the patterns sketched
on paper. He thus continually creates something new; and many
improvements and discoveries have been made by workers whose very
names remain unknown.[209]

The Lyons weavers have retained until now the character of being
the _élite_ of their trade in higher artistic work in silk stuffs.
The finest, really artistic brocades, satins and velvets, are woven
in the smallest workshops, where one or two looms only are kept.
Unhappily the unsettled character of the demand for such a high style
of work is often a cause of misery amongst them. In former times,
when the orders for higher sorts of silks became scarce, the Lyons
weavers resorted to the manufacture of stuffs of lower qualities:
_foulards_, _crêpes_, _tulles_, of which Lyons had the monopoly in
Europe. But now the commoner kinds of goods are manufactured by
the million, on the one side by the factories of Lyons, Saxony,
Russia, and Great Britain, and on the other side by peasants in the
neighbouring departments of France, as well as in the Swiss villages
of the cantons of Basel and Zurich, and in the villages of the Rhine
provinces, Italy, and Russia.

The emigration of the French silk industry from the towns to the
villages began long ago--that is, about 1817--but it was especially
in the ’sixties that this movement took a great development. About
the year 1872 nearly 90,000 hand-looms were scattered, not only
in the Rhône department, but also in those of Ain, Isère, Loire,
Saône-et-Loire, and even those of Drôme, Ardèche, and Savoie.
Sometimes the looms were supplied by the merchants, but most of them
were bought by the weavers themselves, and it was especially women
and girls who worked on them at the hours free from agriculture. But
already since 1835 the emigration of the silk industry from the city
to the villages began in the shape of great factories erected in
the villages, and such factories continue to spread in the country,
making terrible havoc amidst the rural populations.

When a new factory is built in a village it attracts at once the
girls, and partly also the boys of the neighbouring peasantry. The
girls and boys are always happy to find an independent livelihood
which emancipates them from the control of the family. Consequently,
the wages of the factory girls are extremely low. At the same time
the distance from the village to the factory being mostly great, the
girls cannot return home every day, the less so as the hours of
labour are usually long. So they stay all the week at the factory,
in barracks, and they only return home on Saturday evening; while at
sunrise on Monday a waggon makes the tour of the villages, and brings
them back to the factory. Barrack life--not to mention its moral
consequences--soon renders the girls quite unable to work in the
fields. And, when they are grown up, they discover that they cannot
maintain themselves at the low wages offered by the factory; but they
can no more return to peasant life. It is easy to see what havoc the
factory is thus doing in the villages, and how unsettled is its very
existence, based upon the very low wages offered to country girls.
It destroys the peasant home, it renders the life of the town worker
still more precarious on account of the competition it makes to him;
and the trade itself is in a perpetual state of unsettledness.

Some information about the present state of the small industries in
this region will be found in the text; but, unfortunately, we have no
modern description of the industrial life of the Lyons region, which
we might compare with the above.

V.--SMALL INDUSTRIES AT PARIS.

It would be impossible to enumerate here all the varieties of
small industries which are carried on at Paris; nor would such an
enumeration be complete, because every year new industries are
brought into life. I therefore will mention only a few of the most
important industries.

A great number of them are connected, of course, with ladies’
dress. The _confections_--that is, the making of various parts of
ladies’ dress--occupy no less than 22,000 operatives at Paris, and
their production attains £3,000,000 every year, while gowns give
occupation to 15,000 women, whose annual production is valued at
£2,400,000. Linen, shoes, gloves, and so on, are as many important
branches of the petty trades and the Paris domestic industries, while
one-fourth part of the stays which are sewn in France (£500,000 out
of £2,000,000) are made in Paris.

Engraving, book-binding, and all kinds of fancy stationery, as well
as the manufacture of musical and mathematical instruments, are again
as many branches in which the Paris workmen excel. Basket-making is
another very important item, the finest sorts only being made in
Paris, while the plainest sorts are made in the centres mentioned in
the text (Haute Marne, Aisne, etc.). Brushes are also made in small
workshops, the trade being valued at £800,000 both at Paris and in
the neighbouring department of Oise.

For furniture, there are at Paris as many as 4,340 workshops, in
which three or four operatives per workshop are employed on the
average. In the watch trade we find 2,000 workshops with only
6,000 operatives, and their production, about £1,000,000, reaches
nevertheless nearly one-third part of the total watch production in
France. The _maroquinerie_ gives the very high figure of £500,000,
although it employs only 1,000 persons, scattered in 280 workshops,
this high figure itself testifying to the high artistic value of
the Paris leather fancy goods. The jewelry, both for articles of
luxury, and for all descriptions of cheap goods, is again one of
the specialities of the Paris petty trades; and another well-known
speciality is the fabrication of artificial flowers. Finally, we must
mention the carriage and saddlery trades, which are carried on in
the small towns round Paris; the making of fine straw hats; glass
cutting, and painting on glass and china; and numerous workshops for
fancy buttons, attire in mother-of-pearl, and small goods in horn and
bone.

W.--RESULTS OF THE CENSUS OF THE FRENCH INDUSTRIES IN 1896.

If we consult the results of the census of 1896, that were
published in 1901, in the fourth volume of _Résultats statistiques
du recensement des industries et des professions_, preceded by an
excellent summary written by M. Lucien March, we find that the
general impression about the importance of the small industries in
France conveyed in the text is fully confirmed by the numerical data
of the census.

It is only since 1896, M. March says in a paper read before the
Statistical Society of Paris, that a detailed classification of the
workshops and factories according to the number of their operatives
became possible;[210] and he gives us in this paper, in a series of
very elaborate tables, a most instructive picture of the present
state of industry in France.

For the industries proper--including the industries carried on by the
State and the Municipalities, but excluding the transport trades--the
results of the census can be summed up as follows:--

There is, first of all, an important division of “heads of
establishments (_patrons_) working alone, independent artisans,
and working-men without a permanent employment,” which contains
1,530,000 persons. It has a very mixed character, as we find
here, in agriculture, the small farmer, who works for himself; and
the labourer, who works by the day for occasional farmers; and
in industry the head of a small workshop, who works for himself
(_patron-ouvrier_); the working-man, who on the day of the census
had no regular employment; the dressmaker, who works sometimes in
her own room and sometimes in a shop; and so on. It is only in an
indirect way that M. March finds out that this division contains, in
its industrial part, nearly 483,000 artisans (_patrons-ouvriers_);
and independent working-men and women; and about 1,047,000 persons of
both sexes, temporarily attached to some industrial establishment.

There are, next, 37,705 industrial establishments, of which the heads
employ no hired workmen, but are aided by one or more members of
their own families.

We have thus, at least, 520,000 workshops belonging to the very small
industry.

Next to them come 575,530 workshops and factories, giving occupation
to more than 3,000,000 persons. They constitute the bulk of French
industry, and their subdivision into small, middle-sized, and great
industry is what interests us at this moment.

The most striking point is the immense number of establishments
having only from one to ten working-men each. No less than 539,449
such workshops and factories have been tabulated, which makes 94 per
cent. of all the industrial establishments in France; and we find in
them more than one-third of all workpeople of both sexes engaged in
industry--namely, 1,134,700 persons.

Next comes the class, still very numerous (28,626 establishments
and 585,000 operatives), where we find only from eleven to fifty
workmen per establishment. Nearly two-thirds of these small factories
(17,342 establishments, 240,000 workmen) are so small that they give
occupation to less than twenty persons each. They thus belong still
to the small industry.

After that comes a sudden fall in the figures. There are only 3,865
factories having from fifty-one to 100 employees. This class and the
preceding one contain among them 5½ per cent. of all the industrial
establishments, and 27½ per cent. of their employees.

The class of factories employing from 101 to 500 workmen contains
3,145 establishments (616,000 workmen and other employees). But
that of from 501 to 1,000 employees per factory has only 295
establishments, and a total of only 195,000 operatives. Taken
together, these two classes contain less than 1 per cent. of all the
establishments (six per 1,000), and 26 per cent. of all the workmen.

Finally, the number of factories and works having more than a
thousand workmen and employees each is very small. It is only 149.
Out of them, 108 have from 1,001 to 2,000 workmen, twenty-one have
from 2,001 to 5,000, and ten only have more than 5,000 workmen. These
149 very big factories and works give occupation to 313,000 persons
only, out of more than 3,000,000--that is, only 10 per cent. of all
the industrial workers.

It thus appears that more than 99 per cent. of all the industrial
establishments in France--that is, 571,940 out of 575,529--have less
than 100 workmen each. They give occupation to 2,000,000 persons, and
represent an army of 571,940 employers. More than that. The immense
majority of that number (568,075 employers) belong to the category
of those who employ less than fifty workmen each. And I do not yet
count in their number 520,000 employers and artisans who work for
themselves, or with the aid of a member of the family.

It is evident that in France, as everywhere, the petty trades
represent a very important factor of the industrial life. Economists
have been too hasty in celebrating their death. And this conclusion
becomes still more apparent when one analyses the different
industries separately, taking advantage of the tables given in
_Résultats Statistiques_. A very important fact appears from this
analysis--namely, that there are only three branches of industry
in which one can speak of a strong “concentration”--the mines,
metallurgy, and the State’s industries, to which one may add the
textiles and ironmongery, but always remembering that in these two
branches immense numbers of small factories continue to prosper by
the side of the great ones.

In all other branches the small trades are dominant, to such an
extent that more than _95 per cent. of the employers employ less
than fifty workmen each_. In the quarries, in all branches of the
alimentation, in the book trade, clothing, leather, wood, metallic
goods, and even the brick-works, china and glass works, we hardly
find one or two factories out of each hundred employing more than
fifty workmen.

The three industries that make an exception to this rule are, we
have said, metallurgy, the great works of the State, and the mines.
In metallurgy two-thirds of the works have more than fifty men each,
and it is here that we find some twenty great works employing each
of them more than one thousand men. The works of the State, which
include the great shipbuilding yards, are evidently in the same
case. They contain thirty-four establishments, having more than 500
men each, and fourteen employing more than 1,000. And finally, in
the mines--one hardly would believe that--more than one-half of all
establishments employ less than fifty workmen each; but 15 per cent.
of them have more than 500 workmen; forty-one mines are worked by
a staff of more than 1,000 persons each, and six out of them employ
even more than 5,000 miners.

It is only in these three branches that one finds a rather strong
“concentration”; and yet, the small industry continues to exist, as
we saw it already in England, by the side of the great one, even in
mining, and still more so in all branches of metallurgy.

As to the _textile_ industries, they have exactly the same
character as in England. We find here a certain number of very
large establishments (forty establishments having each of them more
than 1,000 workpeople), and especially we see a great development
of the middle-sized factories (1,300 mills having from 100 to 500
workpeople). But on the other side, the small industry is also very
numerous.[211]

Quite the same is also seen in the manufacture of all _metallic
goods_ (iron, steel, brass). Here, also, by the side of a few great
works (seventeen works occupy each of them more than 1,000 workpeople
and salaried employees; out of them five employ more than 2,000
persons, and one more than 5,000); and by the side of a great number
of middle-sized works (440 establishments employing from 100 to 500
persons), we find more than 100,000 artisans who work single-handed,
or with the aid of their families; and 72,600 works which have only
from three to four workpeople.

In the _india-rubber_ works, and those for the manufacture of
_paper_, the middle-sized factories are still well represented (13
per cent. of all the establishments have more than fifty workmen
each); but the remainder belongs to the small industry. It is the
same in the _chemical works_. There is in this branch some ten
factories employing more than 500 persons, and 100 which employ
from 101 to 500 people; but the remainder is 1,000 of small works
employing from ten to fifty people, and 3,800 of the very small works
(less than ten workers).

In all other branches it is _the small or the very small industry_
which dominates. Thus, in the manufacture of articles of food, there
are only eight factories employing more than 500 people each, and
92,000 small establishments having less than ten workpeople each. In
the printing industry the immense majority of establishments are very
small, and employ from five to ten, or from ten to fifty workpeople.

As to the manufacture of _clothing_, it entirely belongs to the small
industry. Only five factories employ more than 200 each; but the
remainder represents 630,000 independent artisans, men and women;
9,500 workshops where the work is done by the family; and 132,000
workshops and factories occupying less than ten workpeople each.[212]

The different branches dealing with straw, feathers, hair, leather,
gloves, again, belong to the small and the very small industry:
125,000 artisans and 43,000 small establishments employing from three
to four persons each.

Shall I speak of the factories dealing with wood, furniture,
brushes, and so on? True, there are in these branches two large
factories employing nearly 2,000 persons; but there are also 214,260
independent artisans and 105,400 small factories and workshops
employing less than ten persons each.

Needless to say that jewelry, the cutting of precious stones, and
stone-cutting for masonry belong entirely to the small industry,
no more than ten to twenty works employing more than 100 persons
each. Only in ceramics and in brick-making do we find by the side
of the very small works (8,930 establishments), and the small ones
(1,277 establishments employing from ten to fifty workpeople), 334
middle-sized works (fifty to 200 workpeople), ninety-three of the
great industry (201 to 1,000), and seven of the very great (more than
1,000 workpeople).[213]

X.--THE SMALL INDUSTRIES IN GERMANY.

The literature of the small industries in Germany being very bulky,
the chief works upon this subject may be found, either in full or
reviewed, in Schmoller’s _Jahrbücher_, and in Conrad’s _Sammlung
national-ökonomischer und statistischer Abhandlungen_. For a
general review of the subject and rich bibliographical indications,
Schönberg’s _Volkwirthschaftslehre_, vol. ii., which contains
excellent remarks about the proper domain of small industries
(p. 401 _seq._), as well as the above-mentioned publication
of K. Bücher (_Untersuchungen über die Lage des Handwerks in
Deutschland_), will be found most valuable. The work of O. Schwarz,
_Die Betriebsformen der modernen Grossindustrie_ (in _Zeitschrift
für Staatswissenschaft_, vol. xxv., p. 535), is interesting by its
analysis of the respective advantages of both the great and the small
industries, which brings the author to formulate the following three
factors in favour of the former: (1) economy in the cost of motive
power; (2) division of labour and its harmonic organisation; and (3)
the advantages offered for the sale of the produce. Of these three
factors, the first is more and more eliminated every year by the
progress achieved in the transmission of power; the second exists in
small industries as well, and to the same extent, as in the great
ones (watchmakers, toy-makers, and so on); so that only the third
remains in full force; but this factor, as already mentioned in the
text of this book, is a _social_ factor which entirely depends upon
the degree of development of the spirit of association amongst the
producers.

A detailed industrial census having been taken in 1907, in addition
to those of 1882 and 1895, most important and quite reliable data
showing the importance and the resistance of the small industries
were brought to light, and a series of most interesting monographs
dealing with this subject have been published. Let me name,
therefore, some of those which could be consulted with profit:
Dr. Fr. Zahn, _Wirtschaftliche Entwicklung, unter besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Volkszählung_, 1905, _sowie der Berufs und
Betriebszählung_, 1907; _Sonderabdruck aus der Annalen des Deutschen
Reichs_, München, 1910 and 1911; Dr. Josef Grunzel, _System der
Industriepolitik_, Leipzig, 1905; and _Der Sieg des Industrialismus_,
Leipzig, 1911; W. Sombart, “Verlagssystem (Hausindustrie)”, in
Conrad, _Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften_, 3te Auflage,
Bd. VIII.; R. van der Borght, _Beruf, Gesellschaftliche Gliederung
und Betrieb im Deutschen Reiche_, in _Vorträge der Gehe-Stiftung_,
Bd. II., 1910; and Heinrich Koch, _Die Deutsche Hausindustrie_, M.
Gladbach, 1905. Many other works will be found mentioned by these
authors.

In all these books the reader will find a further confirmation of the
ideas about the small industries that are expressed in chapters vi.
and vii. When I developed them in the first edition of this book, it
was objected to me that, although the existence of a great number
of small industries is out of question, and although their great
extension in a country so far advanced in its industrial development
as England was not known to economists, still the fact proves
nothing. These industries are a mere survival; and if we had data
about the different classes of industry _at different periods_, we
should see how rapidly the small industries are disappearing.

Now we have such data for Germany, for a period of twenty-five years,
in the three censuses of 1882, 1895, and 1907, and, what is still
more valuable, these twenty-five years belong to a moment in the life
of Germany when a powerful industry has developed on an immense
scale with a great rapidity. Here it is that the dying out of the
small industries, their “absorption” by the great concerns, and the
supposed “concentration of capital” ought to be seen in full.

But the numerical results, as they appear from the three censuses,
and as they have been interpreted by those who have studied them,
are pointing out to quite the reverse. The position of the small
industries in the life of an industrial country is exactly the same
which could have been foreseen twenty-five years ago, and very often
it is described in the very same words that I have used.

The German _Statistisches Jahrbuch_ gives us the distribution of
workmen in the different industries of the German Empire in 1882 and

